Sexual Harassment, Bullying, and School Outcomes for High School Girls and Boys




Abstract
A comparison of the impact of bullying and sexual harassment on five school
outcomes was conducted on a sample of high school students. Results revealed that
sexual harassment was a stronger predictor than bullying of all school outcomes for
both sexes, but especially for girls. This study suggests that sexual harassment, which
activates sexist and heterosexist stereotypes, erodes school engagement, alienates
students from teachers, and adversely affects academic achievement, to a greater
degree than bullying does.
Keywords
sexual harassment, bullying, gender differences, school outcomes
Introduction: A Tale of Two Paradigms
School administrators across America deal with a host of critical issues affecting students
and their safety. Dating violence, drug abuse, and bullying—most recently
cyber-bullying—have captured the attention of school officials, parents, and the
media. Beginning with the Columbine shootings in the 1990s and continuing to recent
high-profile student suicides that resulted from personal attacks posted on popular
social websites, school bullying has become a focal issue for the development of
school programs and the allocation of resources. At the same time, scrutiny of school
sexual harassment as a significant problem has waned. According to the court of
popular opinion and judging by resource allotment, it would appear that bullying is
perceived as more harmful than sexual harassment to the well-being and school
1University of Michigan–Dearborn, USA
2University of Southern Maine, Portland, USA
Corresponding Author:
James Gruber, University of Michigan–Dearborn, 4901 Evergreen Rd, Dearborn, MI 48128, USA.
Email: jegruber@umich.edu
599079 VAWXXX10.1177/1077801215599079Violence Against WomenGruber and Fineran
research-article2015
Gruber and Fineran 113
adjustment of students. However, the feast and famine of resources for bullying and
sexual harassment, respectively, has occurred in a research vacuum: There is little
empirical evidence to support bullying as a greater problem than sexual harassment for
student well-being, school adjustment, or academic success. Not only is sexual harassment
disappearing from the agendas of school districts, but also behaviors that might
otherwise be defined as “sexual harassment” are being subsumed under the expanding
rubric of “sexual bullying,” thereby ignoring their potential illegality (Brown,
Chesney-Lind, & Stein, 2007; Stein & Mennemeier, 2011).
The precipitous rise of bullying as a popular rubric for scrutinizing peer aggression
prompted the Office for Civil Rights (OCR) of the U.S. Department of Education
recently to offer what essentially might be termed a “course correction” for school
officials and policy makers by sending a “Dear Colleague” letter to all school districts.
Specifically, OCR strongly advised schools to distinguish between behaviors that are
inappropriate and harmful from those that constitute a violation of Title IX. They
advised that “by limiting its response to a specific application of its anti-bullying disciplinary
policy, a school may fail to properly consider whether the student misconduct
also results in discriminatory harassment.” They continued with the warning that
such neglect “may lead to inadequate or inappropriate responses that fail to remedy
violations of students’ civil rights” (U.S. Department of Education, OCR, October 26,
2010). The memo reminds readers that Title IX prohibits gender harassment or harassment
of both male and female students regardless of the sex of the harasser.
Concerns have been aired for a number of years by scholars who worried about the
“degendering” effect (Stein, 2003) of bullying paradigms. Bullying behaviors are generally
regarded as troubled interactions between a child and several of his or her peers.
Bullying has been defined in several ways, all of which focus on aggressive or meanspirited
behavior. Research and theory on bullying—in particular, those based on
Olweus, which is arguably the most widely used bullying model in the world (e.g.,
Olweus, 1978, 1993)—tend to focus on the personal or psychological characteristics
of bullies (e.g., severe adjustment problems), situational factors that prompt bullying
or the reciprocity of bullying behaviors (a number of adolescents are characterized as
“bully/victims”), or what Brown and her colleagues (2007) refer to as the “tyranny of
sameness.” The Olweus model, they contend, “offers a one-size-fits-all view of
bullying . . . that erodes differences in gender as well as social class, race, ethnicity,
sexual identity, and ability” (p. 1263). For example, the fact that most bullies are male,
that girls experience more harm than boys from sexual harassment, and that homophobic
comments are used routinely (mostly by boys) to humiliate and control others
(primarily other boys) slips below the radar of scrutiny (American Association of
University Women Educational Foundation [AAUW], 2001; Espelage & Holt, 2001;
Kimmel & Mahler, 2003; Klein, 2006; McGuffey & Rich, 1999).
Sexual harassment, in contrast, might be defined as aggressive or mean-spirited
behavior with specific gender or sexual content that creates or reinforces an imbalance
of power. The U.S. Department of Education (2010) defines sexual harassment as
“unwelcome conduct of a sexual nature which may include unwelcome sexual
advances, requests for sexual favors, or other verbal, nonverbal, or physical conduct of 
114 Violence Against Women 22(1)
a sexual nature.” Although the adverse effects of bullying and sexual harassment may
appear to be similar, we argue below that the experiences are fundamentally distinct
and result in different outcomes. Specifically, we believe that sexual harassment
affects students more adversely than bullying because harassment is directly related to
hegemonic masculinity and therefore taps into potent structural and culturally sanctioned
stereotypes and power relationships (masculine–feminine, heterosexual–
homosexual) that are central components of social stratification. Or, as Franke (1997)
says, “sexual harassment is the technology of sexism. It creates a social context that
feminizes women, masculinizes men, and enforces gender norms to keep nonconformists
in line” (p. 696). Hegemonic masculinity has three central characteristics: emotional
detachment (and correspondingly, derision of emotionality as a weakness),
competitiveness (and a consequent development of gendered/sexual hierarchies), and
sexual objectification of females such that masculinity is thought of as being superior
to femininity (McGuffey & Rich, 1999; Robinson, 2005).
Focal Issues of the Study
The present study will attempt to provide clarity to a critical social problem, peer victimization,
which is clouded by murky policy and conflicting research studies. With
this in mind, our research addresses three questions, as follows:
Research Question 1: Which is the more common problem at school—bullying or
sexual harassment?
Research Question 2: Are there differences between the sexes with regard to peer
victimization?
Research Question 3: Do sexual harassment and bullying affect school attachment
and academic performance in different ways?
Research Issues
How Much Bullying and Sexual Harassment Is There?
It is difficult to answer this seemingly straightforward question because of significant
differences in survey design among researchers who focus on bullying or sexual
harassment. Although “question/response format” or “time frame” may seem like
purely academic concerns, they have a direct bearing on reported frequencies of victimization
that are not only cited in academic journals but are also often publicized by
highly visible media outlets. The body of research that examines bullying and/or sexual
harassment among adolescents might lead one to believe that bullying is fairly
infrequent although sexual harassment occurs in epidemic proportions. Generally bullying
studies, especially those using the Olweus protocol, report low rates, typically
less than 15% (e.g., Eslea, Memesini, Moore, & Morita, 2003; Williams, Connolly,
Pepler, & Craig, 2005), whereas large, nationally representative surveys of school
sexual harassment find victimization rates in excess of 80% (AAUW, 1993, 2001).
Gruber and Fineran 115
These wide divergences in victimization rates are due, among other factors, to the
way questions are presented to the respondents and to the time frames they are asked
to consider. With regard to the first issue, bullying studies typically ask students if they
have been bullied (e.g., “We say a student is being bullied when . . .”), whereas sexual
harassment surveys intentionally omit the term “sexual harassment” from their queries.
The AAUW surveys, for example, asked students, “How often has anyone done
the following things to you when you did not want them to?” and then listed 14 behaviors
and asked them to indicate whether and how often they had experienced each.
Sexual harassment surveys have generally avoided using the term “sexual harassment”
in their survey instruments because it results in a significant underreporting of behaviors
that researchers or legal scholars might otherwise consider to be sexual harassment
(Fitzgerald & Shullman, 1993; Gruber, 1990).
Another difference between bullying and sexual harassment research is the time
frame for victimization or perpetration that is presented to respondents. For example,
DeSouza and Ribeiros (2005) used “last 30 days” for bullying and “last 12 months” for
sexual harassment. Similarly, Williams et al. (2005) framed bullying as experiences that
occurred “during the last 2 months” and sexual harassment as “during the last 6 months.”
Holt and Espelage (2007), using AAUW (2001) questions with a 1-year time frame
(“during the last 12 months”) along with their own bullying scale items and time frame
(“last 30 days”), found that 70% of the students had been harassed whereas a little more
than half (54%) had been bullied. The AAUW surveys (1993, 2001) that reported harassment
rates in excess of 80% asked students whether they had experienced unwanted
sexual behavior at some point during their high school years. Therefore, it is not surprising
that sexual harassment might appear to be rampant in schools compared with bullying
when the questions and response formats and the time frames differ substantially.
Observations of everyday life in schools, whether these are based on reports from
students, teachers, or parents, or from research, suggest that aggressive, inappropriate,
or mean-spirited behavior is fairly common. Commonly used bullying scales (Holt &
Espelage, 2007; Olweus, 1993) ask students about being teased, made fun of, pushed,
picked on, and excluded from social groups. Their research suggests that much of this
behavior stems from individual or situational factors rather than specific categorical
discrimination (e.g., gender-based harassment). In other words, sexually harassing
behaviors are more distinct and, therefore, less frequent forms of victimization than
bullying behaviors.
Hypothesis 1: We predict that bullying will occur more frequently than sexual
harassment. We believe that this difference will be borne out when bullying and
sexual harassment items are presented in an identical manner in a survey.
Who Are the Targets of Bullying and Sexual Harassment?
The AAUW study (2001) found a small gender difference: 83% of the girls and 79%
of the boys reported being sexually harassed by a current or former student at school.
Evidence of larger gender differences emerged in other studies. Specifically, girls 
116 Violence Against Women 22(1)
experience sexual harassment more frequently than boys, but boys perpetrate sexual
harassment more often (Fineran & Bennett, 1999; Hand & Sanchez, 2000; Hill & Kearl,
2011; McMaster, Connolly, Pepler, & Craig, 2002; Trigg & Wittenstrom, 1996). Trigg
and Wittenstrom (1996) and the AAUW (2001) noted that the only sexually harassing
behavior that boys experienced at a higher rate than girls was being called gay.
Bullying is sex specific: Although boys bully girls, most of their activity is targeted at
other boys (e.g., Espelage & Holt, 2001). Similarly, girls tend to bully other girls, but they
infrequently bully boys (Basile, Espelage, Rivers, McMahon, & Simon, 2009). Bullying
is related to both socialization and developmental factors. These patterns have been established
in international samples of students (Peskin, Tortolero, & Markham, 2006). As
children reach middle school, sexual harassment becomes more frequent as dominance
behavior is driven more frequently by gender stereotypes and sexualized behavior
(Pelligrini, 2001). Espelage, Basile, and Hamburger (2011) provided empirical evidence
for what they referred to as a bully sexual violence pathway. Specifically, bullying perpetration
early in middle school predicted sexual harassment perpetration 3 years later. An
increase in sexually harassing behavior between middle school and high school was also
found in a study of girls (Gruber & Fineran, 2007). In contrast to bullying, sexual harassment
involves greater cross-sex behavior where girls are the primary targets of boys.
Hypothesis 2: Boys will experience more bullying than girls, but girls will experience
more sexual harassment.
What Is the Impact of Peer Victimization on School Attachment and
Academic Success?
Overall, it appears that the school outcomes for harassed and bullied students are quite
similar. There are no studies, however, which offer a “head to head” comparison of the
effects of each type of victimization. The AAUW studies (AAUW, 2001; Hill & Kearl,
2011) found that students who experienced sexual harassment reported more school
absence or skipping classes, thinking about changing schools, lowered concentration,
less participation in class, decreased quality of schoolwork, lower grades, and loss of
friends. Nearly a quarter of the students in the recent study reported not wanting to
attend school because of their experience of sexual harassment. The impact was generally
larger among girls. Other studies that examined sex differences (Corbett, Gentry,
& Pearson, 1993; Hand & Sanchez, 2000) revealed similar outcomes.
Bullying studies have tended to focus on psychological (e.g., depression, anger)
and environmental (e.g., drug use, interpersonal/family violence, delinquency) stressors
rather than academic and/or school performance variables, but there are some
notable exceptions. Nansel et al. (2001) found that poor academic achievement and
poor relationships with classmates were associated with bullying and being a bully/
victim (both bully and victim). An Australian study (Skues, Cunningham, & Pokharel,
2005) showed that students who were bullied by their peers at school tended to report
feeling less connected to their peers, teachers, and school and being less motivated to
perform well at school
Gruber and Fineran 117
We would argue that three factors make sexual harassment distinctive as a form of
victimization. First, sexual harassment is directly linked to hegemonic masculinity. Or,
as Robinson (2005) says, sexual harassment is a practice of “doing hegemonic masculinity”
(p. 20). Sexual harassment is driven by cultural stereotypes about gender and
sexuality that function to construct and reinforce imbalanced power relationships.
Although bullied students often receive disrespectful treatment because of individual
differences—for example, being perceived as too short, overweight, or unattractive—
sexual harassment activates stereotypes about gender and sexuality with deep cultural
roots that reinforce dominance hierarchies (male/female, masculine/feminine) that are
arguably the primary bases of according power and privilege in society. These stereotypes
not only affect self-identity but also influence attitudes and beliefs, selfpresentations,
and patterns of interactions within and between social categories (Swan
& Wyer, 1997). Second, and related to the first, the asymmetrical nature of sexual
harassment increases its impact. Bullying occurs both within and across sex groups.
Also, bullies themselves are often victims of bullying (hence, the term “bully-victim”
that appears widely in bullying literature). In contrast, harassment victimization is
lopsided: It is targeted at specific categories of people, and the victims are handicapped
in their ability to respond effectively and to ward off harm because of the
power of cultural stereotypes. A substantial research literature on the effects of sexual
harassment shows that these types of experiences, whether at work or in school, occur
more frequently among and have more adverse effects on girls and women than on
boys and men (see Morgan & Gruber, 2011, for a review). Harassment not only affects
health and well-being, but it also casts a pall on the work (Schneider, Swan, & Fitzgerald,
1998) or school (AAUW, 2001; Hill & Kearl, 2011) environment that results in alienation
and estrangement. Although girls and women tend to suffer more adverse effects
from harassment than boys and men, the latter are not immune from experiencing emotional
damage. In this regard, sexual harassment as a method of doing hegemonic masculinity
accounts for the power of homophobia. Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender
(LGBT) students have poorer mental and physical health, less engagement with school,
and higher suicidality than their heterosexual peers (Gruber & Fineran, 2008; KatzWise
& Hyde, 2012; Williams et al., 2005). The harm of homophobia extends to
“straight” boys as well. Poteat and Espelage (2007), for example, found that homophobic
slurs compared with other types of comments resulted in increased anxiety and
depression, and greater alienation from school among middle school children, particularly
boys. Along the same lines, Swearer, Turner, Givens, and Pollack (2008) discovered
that among boys, being called gay had a greater negative impact on depression,
anxiety, and perceptions of school climate than bullying did. In sum, the sexual harassment
paradigm better explains why some students are generally perpetrators (boys) and
others are victims (girls and “non-masculine” boys) and why attacks on gender identity
(e.g., homophobic slurs) cause more harm than other kinds of abuse.
Hypothesis 3a: Sexual harassment will have greater adverse effects than bullying
on school outcomes.
Hypothesis 3b: The impact of sexual harassment on school outcomes will be
greater for girls.
118 Violence Against Women 22(1)
Method
Sample
Data were collected from students at a middle school and a high school in a suburban
New England community as well as from a middle school and two high schools in southeastern
Michigan who completed paper-and-pencil surveys during classes that drew a
wide range of students. Parental consent forms were sent home with the students. The
parents were told that the survey covered a range of topics, including bullying and sexual
harassment, attitudes toward school, and health and well-being. Students who received
parental consent were given an assent form along with the survey during class. Both
parental consent and student assent forms followed Institutional Review Board procedures
which specified that the survey was voluntary and that information given by the
students was confidential. The New England sample consisted of 236 girls and 337 boys;
the Michigan sample had 102 girls and 86 boys. The samples reflected both the racial
compositions of the schools and the communities in which they were located. The
average age of the students was 15 years. About a third of the sample was 16 or older; a
quarter was 14 or younger. Seventy percent described themselves as White. African
Americans and Hispanics were 17% and 9%, respectively, of the sample. About half of
the parents (48% of mothers and 53% of fathers) had no more than a high school education.
About a quarter (24% of mothers and 22% of fathers) had college degrees. The
middle school response rate (53%) was higher than that of the high school students
(48%). The response rate was 51% for New England and 56% for Michigan.
Measures
Bullying and sexual harassment. Ten survey items developed by Espelage and Holt
(2001) and 14 items from the AAUW (2001) survey were used to measure bullying
and sexual harassment, respectively. The bullying items, for example, asked students
if they had been pushed, threatened, or excluded from social groups. The sexual
harassment items included repeated date requests, sexual rumoring, touching of a sexual
nature, and being the recipient of sexually offensive comments. Students were
asked how often they had experienced each behavior (never, a few times [once or
twice], many times) since the beginning of the school year, who the perpetrators were,
and about their reactions. After responding to the 24 items, students were asked additional
questions about their “worst experience.” Of interest for this article were
responses to the degree to which they found this worst experience to be annoying,
embarrassing, offensive, disturbing, upsetting, threatening, or frightening. Each of 7
items had five response categories (not at all, slightly, somewhat, very, and extremely
upset). A factor analysis of the 7 items resulted in a one-factor solution (eigenvalue =
4.05, explained variance = 57.9%) The items were combined to create an Upsetting
Scale (range = 0-28): M = 13.4, SD = 6.08.
The 10 bullying and 14 sexual harassment items were factor analyzed separately using
varimax rotation. The result was a one-factor solution for each (Bullying: eigenvalue =
6.2, explained variance = 61%; Sexual harassment [SH]: eigenvalue = 10.5, explained 
Gruber and Fineran 119
variance = 80.4%). The individual items tapping frequency of experiences were
summed to create the respective scales of peer victimization. Each scale had high reliability:
Bullying (Cronbach’s α = .87) and SH (α = .90). For regression analysis, we
created scales that summed all the bullying or harassment experiences that a student
had had (0-20 and 0-28, respectively). The scales were reduced to 0-10 scales to eliminate
cells with very low frequencies and to create scales of equivalent length. Because
this procedure captured both the range and frequency of bullying or SH, the scales
(each 0-10) represent the preponderance of each form of peer victimization. For t tests
and cross-tabulation, we defined a student as being bullied or harassed if he or she had
three or more different experiences at least a few times (e.g., a student was “bullied” if
he or she was teased, was pushed or shoved, and was excluded from friends). This
dichotomous variable both acknowledges and extends the study of bullying published
by Peskin and her colleagues (2006), who defined a victim of bullying as a person who
had experienced at least one type of bullying behavior at least 3 times in the last 30
days. In contrast, researchers have often labeled a student as being bullied or sexually
harassed if she or he experienced a single type of behavior even once (AAUW, 2001;
Leaper & Brown, 2008).
School outcomes. Four measures of school attachment were used in this study along
with a measure of academic performance. The school outcomes were only modestly
intercorrelated (.25-.45), which suggests that each tapped unique aspects of school
experiences (see Appendix A).
Overall, School Satisfaction was one of three scales that we used from Bowen and
Richman’s (1995) School Success Profile. The seven items comprising this scale (e.g.,
“I enjoy going to this school,” “Every student is important at this school”) were factor
analyzed using varimax rotation. The result was a one-factor solution (eigenvalue =
2.58, explained variance = 72%) that had good reliability (α = .81). A 1-7 scale was
created that accommodated cells with very low frequencies.
Teacher Support was based on eight items with true/false response categories (e.g.,
“My teachers really care about me,” “I receive a lot of encouragement from my teachers”)
developed by Bowen and Richman (1995). A one-factor solution resulted (eigenvalue
= 3.23, explained variance = 48.6%). The scale (1-7) that resulted from
combining these items had good reliability (α = .84).
Academic engagement. Thirteen items developed by Hanisch and Hulin (1991) to measure
work stress were modified by the authors to fit a school setting (e.g., “Made
excuses to miss school or class,” “Thought about leaving school without graduating”).
They were entered into a factor analysis with varimax rotation. Each item had five
response categories ranging from never to many times. Three items had factor loadings
below .50 and were dropped from further consideration. The first of two factors
(eigenvalue = 5.85, explained variance = 45.1%) tapped students’ problems with academic
engagement (e.g., “Ignored homework assignments,” “Spent time daydreaming,
doodling in class”). The five items were summed and subsequently converted to a
1-9 scale (α = .85)
120 Violence Against Women 22(1)
School withdrawal was based on the second factor (eigenvalue = 1.68, explained
variance = 18.8%) that tapped students’ commitment to staying in school. Five items
(e.g., “Thought about leaving school without graduating,” “Skipped school”) were
summed and converted to a 1-7 scale (α = .81).
Academic performance (grades) was based on a single survey item that asked,
“What is your overall grade average this year?” Seven response categories ranged
from mostly A’s to mostly D’s and F’s.
Data Analysis Plan
Different procedures were used to test the hypotheses. Cross-tabulation (and χ2) was
used in Table 1. Tables 2, 3, and 4 presented the results primarily of t tests. Table 5
presented the results of a “head to head” comparison of bullying and SH through
regression analysis. Bivariate correlations were presented (Appendix A) to demonstrate
the modest correlations among the dependent variables. The decision to analyze
girls and boys separately was based on results from two outcomes of data analysis.
First, bivariate correlations between each Gender × Victimization variable (SH ×
Gender and Bully × Gender) and each outcome were significant (Appendix A).
However, a stronger argument for separating girls and boys was made by regressing
three predictors—gender, victimization (bullying or SH), and Victimization ×
Gender—on each outcome (Appendix B). This procedure revealed the unique contribution
of each Victimization × Gender variable in predicting an outcome independent
of the influences of either gender or victimization. The SH × Gender and Bully ×
Gender variables each predicted four of the five outcomes. Overall, the interaction
items, though significant, were modest in size ranging from b = .094 (Gender × Bully
for School Satisfaction) to b = .162 (Gender × SH for Academic Engagement). We
believe that these results provide a sufficient rationale for analyzing girls and boys
separately.
Table 1. Gender Differences in Bullying and Sexual Harassment Experiences (%).
Ever
experienced
3 or more
experiences
3 or more
experiences
Bullying
Sexual
Harassment Bullying Sexual harassment
Total (N = 708) 77a 63 53a 39
Gender
Boys (n = 369) 75a 62 52a 37
Girls (n = 277) 80a 70 54b 44
a
Based on difference of proportions tests and χ2 values, differences between ever bullied and ever
harassed or between 3+ bullying experiences and 3+ harassment experiences are statistically significant
at p < .01. bDifferences between ever bullied and ever harassed or between 3+ bullying experiences and 3+
harassment experiences are statistically significant at p < .05.
Gruber and Fineran 121
Data Analysis
The Incidence and Targets of Bullying and Sexual Harassment
Our analysis presented results for bullying and sexual harassment in two forms: percentages
of students who had checked any of the 10 bullying or 14 sexual harassment
items and percentages of students who had three or more different bullying or harassment
experiences since the beginning of the school year. Seventy-seven percent of
students had at least one bullying experience during the school year; 63% had at least
one harassment experience. Using the 3+ experience threshold, the percentages
dropped significantly: 53% of students were bullied, whereas 39% were sexually
harassed. Our results support Hypothesis 1.
Bullying was a more common experience than sexual harassment. This was the
case for both sexes. For example, more than half of the boys were bullied (52%) but a
little more than a third had been harassed 3 or more times χ2(1, N = 369) = 96.2, p =
.000. However, the data did not support Hypothesis 2. We argued that boys would
experience more bullying whereas girls would encounter more sexual harassment.
There were, in fact, no significant gender differences in either bullying or sexual
Table 2. Bullying and School Outcomes for Girls and Boys.
Not bullied Bullied
M/(SD)a M/(SD)b D β/(SD)c
Overall school satisfaction 2.70 (1.6) 3.14 (1.7)** .197 (0.09)**
Boys 2.93 (1.7) 3.84 (1.8)* .21
Girls 2.42 (1.6) 2.94 (1.7)* .32
Teacher support 2.88 (1.9) 3.31 (2.0)* .112 (0.08)*
Boys 3.13 (2.1) 3.41 (2.0) .13
Girls 2.75 (1.6) 3.21 (1.9)* .36
Academic engagement 4.36 (2.5) 5.57 (2.3)** .258 (0.06)**
Boys 4.68 (2.6) 5.75 (2.4)** .43
Girls 3.97 (2.3) 5.35 (2.2)** .61
School withdrawal 2.26 (1.9) 3.25 (2.7)* .201 (0.08)**
Boys 3.10 (1.9) 3.43 (2.1) .16
Girls 2.76 (1.6) 3.21 (1.8) .39
Grades 3.42 (1.8) 3.86 (1.8)* .172 (0.01)**
Boys 3.66 (1.8) 3.94 (1.9) .15
Girls 3.14 (1.7) 3.76 (1.6) .38
a
Higher means are associated with poorer outcomes—lower grades, less satisfaction, less perceived
support, lower academic engagement, and higher withdrawal—and a higher preponderance of bullying.
bSignificance levels are based on t tests. cStandardized regression coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) are presented. Bullying was
used as the sole predictor in each equation.
*p < .005 (p < .05 with Bonferroni’s correction). **p < .001 (p < .01 with Bonferroni’s correction).
122 Violence Against Women 22(1)
harassment victimization. Further analyses revealed that there were no significant age
differences in bullying or sexual harassment (see Appendix A).
Although there were no gender differences in victimization, there were very clear
patterns in perpetration.1 Boys were the perpetrators for nearly all of the bullying and
sexual harassment items. Overall, boys bullied other boys and girls, but boys harassed
Table 3. Sexual Harassment and School Outcomes for Girls and Boys.
Not harassed Harassed
M/(SD)a M/(SD)b κ β/(SD)c
Overall school satisfaction 2.58 (1.6) 3.42 (1.8)** .279 (.08)**
Boys 2.88 (1.7) 3.52 (1.7)** .37
Girls 2.18 (1.4) 3.31 (1.8)** .70
Teacher support 2.88 (1.9) 3.41 (2.0)** .169 (.07)**
Boys 3.16 (2.0) 3.43 (2.1) .13
Girls 2.50 (1.7) 3.37 (1.9)** .48
Academic engagement 4.45 (2.5) 5.73 (2.3)** .235 (.06)**
Boys 4.86 (2.6) 5.81 (2.3)* .41
Girls 3.87 (2.3) 5.62 (2.2)** .78
School withdrawal 2.13 (2.7) 3.63 (3.7)** .304 (.08)**
Boys 2.96 (1.9) 3.71 (2.0)** .38
Girls 2.68 (1.6) 3.80 (1.7)** .68
Grades 3.36 (1.8) 4.06 (1.7)** .225 (.02)**
Boys 3.60 (1.8) 4.13 (1.9)* .28
Girls 3.04 (1.7) 3.97 (1.6)** .56
a
Higher means are associated with poorer outcomes—lower grades, less satisfaction, less perceived
support, poorer academic engagement, and higher withdrawal—and a higher preponderance of sexual
harassment.
bSignificance levels are based on t tests. cStandardized regression coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) are presented. Sexual
harassment was used as the sole predictor in each equation.
*p < .005 (p < .05 with Bonferroni’s correction). **p < .001 (p < .01 with Bonferroni’s correction).
Table 4. Upset Scale for Bullying, Sexual Harassment, and Gender (N = 367).a
Bullying Sexual harassment
M/(SD) M/(SD)
All victimized students 11.6 (7.4) 14.2 (8.1)**
Boys 10.6 (8.2) 12.7 (8.7)
Girls 12.8 (7.1) 15.3 (7.2)**b
a
Upset Scale has a 0-28 range. Higher scores indicate greater upset.
bDifference between means for boys and girls is significant at p < .01.
**Difference between bullying and sexual harassment is significant at p < .01.
Gruber and Fineran 123
girls mostly. Boys were very rarely the targets of harassment or bullying by girls. More
than three quarters of boys (77%) but less than half (45%) of girls were bullied by
boys, χ2(2, N = 483) = 62.8, p < .000. In contrast, boys were perpetrators of sexual
harassment among both boys and girls (70% and 64%, respectively). Our results are
consistent with other studies of perpetrators of bullying (see Basile et al., 2009, for a
review) and sexual harassment (AAUW, 2001; DeSouza & Ribeiro, 2005; Gruber &
Fineran, 2008; Hill & Kearl, 2011).
Bullying, harassment, and school outcomes. The initial procedures for testing Hypotheses
3a (sexual harassment will have a greater impact than bullying on school outcomes)
and 3b (girls will be affected adversely more so than boys) involved t tests, effect sizes
(Cohen’s d), and simple regression. The results enable us to test the hypotheses by
conducting side-by-side comparisons—that is, comparing the results from analyses of
bullying and school outcomes (Table 2) with those from separate analyses of sexual
Table 5. Impact of Bullying, Sexual Harassment on School Outcomes for Girls and Boys.
Total sample Girlsa Boys
Outcomesb
Overall school satisfaction
 Bullying .041 (.02) .087 (.03) .074 (.02)
 SexHar .283 (.03)** .307 (.03)** .203 (.03)**
 Adjusted R2 .079 .089 .048
Teacher support
 Bullying .023 (.02) .082 (.03) .060 (.03)
 SexHar .159 (.02)** .215 (.03)** .133 (.03)*
 Adjusted R2 .029 .035 .008
Academic withdrawal
 Bullying .158 (.02)** .095 (.04) .190 (.03)**
 SexHar .162 (.03)** .252 (.04)** .066 (.03)
 Adjusted R2 .082 .102 .044
School withdrawal
 Bullying .027 (.02) .068 (.03) .038 (.02)
 SexHar .290 (.03)** .323 (.03)** .238 (.03)**
 Adjusted R2 .125 .147 .032
Grades
 Bullying .053 (.02) .112 (.03) .029 (.03)
 SexHar .192 (.02)** .169 (.03)** .214 (.03)**
 Adjusted R2 .052 .064 .037
a
Regressions were conducted separately for girls and boys. Bullying and sexual harassment were entered
simultaneously.
bPositive regression coefficients are associated with being bullied or harassed and having poor school
attachment or poor grades.
*p < .05. **p < .01.
124 Violence Against Women 22(1)
harassment and school outcomes (Table 3). This involves counting the number of significant
t tests and comparing effect sizes and regression coefficient strength. Hypothesis
3a receives modest support from the data. Regression coefficients and t tests are
significant for all five bullying–school outcome and all five sexual harassment–school
outcome relationships. However, the relationships are generally stronger for sexual
harassment than for bullying. For example, the sexual harassment–school satisfaction
coefficient (b = .279, p < .01) is stronger than the corresponding figure for bullying
(b = .197, p < .01). Comparisons for teacher support, school withdrawal, and grades
lead to the same conclusion. Only academic engagement has a larger coefficient for
bullying (b = .258, p < .01) than for sexual harassment (b = .235, p < .01).
Hypothesis 3b receives considerable support from the data. This can be seen, first
of all, by the number of significant t tests. There was a total of nine significant t tests
for sexual harassment and school outcomes (5 for girls, 4 for boys), but only four
(3 for girls, 1 for boys) for bullying and school outcomes. More evidence of the greater
impact of peer victimization, especially sexual harassment, on girls can be found
through a comparison of effect sizes. Effect sizes are substantially larger (arbitrarily
gauged as a difference of .10 or greater) for girls for each school outcome and bullying
(Table 2) and each outcome and sexual harassment (Table 3). In several instances, the
effect size for girls is nearly twice as large as the one for boys. For example, the effect
size for sexual harassment–school satisfaction for girls (d = .70) is much stronger than
the one for boys (d = .37). Effect sizes can also be used to compare results for bullying
with those of sexual harassment. In this regard, effect sizes are larger for sexual harassment
than bullying among boys for three outcomes (school satisfaction, school withdrawal,
and grades). But among the girls, sexual harassment effect sizes are larger than
the corresponding ones for bullying for all five outcomes. For example, the effect size
for sexual harassment–school satisfaction for girls is substantially larger (d = .70) than
the corresponding one for bullying–school satisfaction (d = .32).
The data results from our side-by-side comparisons provide compelling evidence to
support Hypotheses 3a and 3b. However, a stronger argument for the power of one
form of victimization over the other in adversely affecting school outcomes can be
made through a head-to-head comparison where bullying and sexual harassment are
analyzed simultaneously in the same model.
Comparing bullying and harassment. If our analysis to this point is instructive, it would
seem that sexual harassment is a stronger predictor of adverse school outcomes than
bullying, especially for girls. To provide more compelling evidence in this regard, we
created head-to-head comparisons. We accomplished this by entering bullying and
sexual harassment together in regression analyses with each school outcome variable.
Separate analyses were conducted for the entire sample, girls, and boys. Because bullying
and sexual harassment were correlated (r = .55, p < .01) collinearity diagnostics
that are available on SPSS 17.0 were conducted for each outcome and each group. An
examination of tolerance and condition index figures for the 20 regression equations
revealed that multicollinearity was not a problem because the lowest levels of the former
were .65 and figures for the latter did not exceed 11.0. Tolerance levels that are 
Gruber and Fineran 125
less than .10 (Norusis, 2004) or condition index levels more than 30 (Belsley, Kuh, &
Welsch, 1980) indicate significant multicollinearity problems.
The results of our analyses for direct bullying-sexual harassment comparisons are
presented in Table 5. Our interpretations of the data in Table 5 addressed three questions:
What is the range of negative impact of bullying and sexual harassment (How
many outcomes were significantly affected by bullying or sexual harassment)? Second,
which is the better predictor (i.e., a larger and/or significant coefficient) of each outcome?
Finally, were there gender differences regarding the impact of bullying or sexual
harassment on each outcome?
A perusal of the regression coefficients in Table 5 revealed that sexual harassment
has overall a larger role in predicting school outcomes than does bullying. More specifically,
bullying is a significant predictor in only 2 of 15 equations (academic engagement
for the entire sample, b = .158, p < .01, and for boys, b = .190, p < .01), whereas
sexual harassment is a significant predictor in 14. Sexual harassment predicted each
outcome for the entire sample with coefficients ranging from b = .290 (school withdrawal)
to b = .159 (teacher support). There are, however, notable sex differences in
number of significant relationships as well as in coefficient sizes. Bullying did not
predict any of the outcomes for girls and only one for boys. In contrast, sexual harassment
predicted all five outcomes among girls and four for boys. Among the girls, the
coefficients for sexual harassment ranged from b = .323 (school withdrawal) to b =
.169 (grades). All of the harassment–outcome coefficients for girls were larger than the
corresponding ones for boys. The answers to the three questions we posed earlier for
our interpretations in this section are fairly straightforward. Sexual harassment had a
broader range of impact than bullying. Of 15 equations, sexual harassment was a significant
predictor in 14, whereas bullying was significant in 2. Given this disparity in
significant relationships, the answer to the second question—which one is the better
predictor—was clear. With the exception of the two significant bullying–outcome
relationships, sexual harassment coefficients were considerably larger than those for
bullying in each direct or “head-to-head” comparison. Finally, the differential impact
of victimization between the sexes was also noteworthy. Sexual harassment predicted
all five outcomes among girls and four for boys. An overall picture of differences in
the adverse effects of peer victimization can be seen through the adjusted R2 values:
Those for girls were all larger than the corresponding ones for boys.
Our results, then, gave considerable support to Hypotheses 3a and 3b. Although
both bullying and sexual harassment are independently related to adverse school outcomes
(Tables 2 and 3), it was only when they are regressed together that a clearer
picture of the roles of each emerged (Table 5). The results for boys were unexpected.
We hypothesized that bullying would play a significant role in school outcomes for
boys, whereas sexual harassment would be a greater factor among girls. Bullying, in
fact, was not a substantial predictor for either sex. Boys were adversely affected by
sexual harassment, though not to the degree that girls were. An interesting question that
arose from our data is as follows: Why does sexual harassment, which occurs less frequently
than bullying, have a greater impact on school outcomes? We argued earlier
that this is because of the power of sexism (and heterosexism) in causing harm, which
is driven by sexual harassment. Our data showed that girls were more adversely affected 
126 Violence Against Women 22(1)
than boys by peer victimization (e.g., the regression coefficients and adjusted R2 values
in Table 5 for boys were generally smaller than the corresponding ones for girls).
Based on previous research, both on schools (AAUW, 2001) and workplaces
(Schneider et al., 1998), which found that sexual harassment caused greater emotional
distress among females than males, we decided to compare the emotional reaction
with bullying and sexual harassment among those in our sample who had been victimized.
The data for such a comparison were drawn from a section of the survey where
students who had checked 1 of the 10 bullying or 14 sexual harassment items were
asked to describe their “worst experience.” Most of these experiences (56%) were
sexual harassment. They were asked a series of questions about the experience (e.g.,
perpetrator sex, location of the incident, person[s]), including how upset they were by
the experience. We posed two questions for this analysis: Is sexual harassment more
upsetting than bullying? And are there gender differences with regard to the emotional
distress of bullying and sexual harassment? With regard to the first question, sexual
harassment was significantly more upsetting than bullying, M = 14.2 and M = 11.6,
t(365) = 2.79, p < .01. The answer to the second question was more complex. There
was a significant difference between sexual harassment and bullying for girls, M =
15.3 and M = 12.8, t(182) = 2.93, p < .01, but not for boys. Finally, although girls were
more upset than boys by both bullying and sexual harassment, only the latter difference
was statistically significant, M = 15.3 and M = 12.7, t(202) = 3.04, p < .01. The
strong relationships between peer victimization and school outcomes among girls may
be due, in part, to the fact that they appraise their experiences differently than boys
(Ormerod, Collinsworth, & Perry, 2007). Boys, for example, might be more reluctant
to label experiences as “frightening” because doing so would appear unmanly. Overall,
girls state that they are more upset than boys by the same types of harassment—say,
sexual jokes or comments. Another reason for the gender difference is that girls are
exposed to more severe forms of sexual harassment—for example, sexual touching/
grabbing or sexual rumors (Fineran, 2002; Hand & Sanchez, 2000). Our analyses (not
shown) of the 24 individual bullying and sexual harassment items supported these
explanations. Girls stated that they were more upset than boys by a wide range of peer
victimization experiences, and at the same time, they experienced a higher incidence
of severe harassment, such as sexual contact (touching/grabbing, kissing, forced sex)
and sexual rumors. However, because of a low n for some of these individual items,
we did not place a great deal of confidence in these results.
Discussion
The Harm of Peer Victimization: Summary of Findings
High school students today face a myriad of challenges in developing and maintaining
healthy relationships with family, peers, and schools. Many girls face challenges to
their sense of well-being in a society that emphasizes slimness and beauty. A number
of boys, especially those from lower-income backgrounds, fail to complete high
school. Gay and lesbian students face stigmatization in a society that refuses to
acknowledge their rights and identity. In the sea of influences that affect adolescents’ 
Gruber and Fineran 127
orientation to school and academic achievement, we sought in this article to determine
the role of peer victimization. More specifically, we wanted to compare the impact of
bullying with sexual harassment on school attachment and academic performance. We
found that when bullying and sexual harassment were measured in the same way with
similar time frames, bullying occurred more frequently. There were no significant gender
differences with regard to either.
The results of t tests and simple regressions for bullying and sexual harassment individually
(what we referred to as side-by-side comparisons) revealed that both forms of
peer victimization were significantly related to most of the school outcomes, suggesting
perhaps that both have similar roles in affecting student attachment and performance. It
was only when bullying and sexual harassment were entered together in the same regression
analyses (head-to-head comparisons) that a very different picture emerged. In the
vast majority of regression equations, sexual harassment emerged as the better predictor
both in terms of coefficient size and significance level. There were clear differences in
this regard. Four of the sexual harassment coefficients for school outcome variables
were larger for girls than boys. The adjusted R2 values provided further evidence of differences:
The values were higher for girls than boys on all five outcomes. In an earlier
study, we found significant relationships between peer victimization—sexual harassment
in particular—and health outcomes (Gruber & Fineran, 2008). In this article, we
found that peer victimization—especially sexual harassment—alienated students from
school, undermined their relationships with teachers, and adversely affected their grades.
Sexual Harassment: Back to School and Out of the Shadows
From the early years of legal theory (e.g., MacKinnon, 1979) and social research (e.g.,
U.S. Merit Systems Protection Board [USMSPB], 1988), sexual harassment was viewed
not as random acts of violence but as actions that were targeted. Specifically, men were
overwhelmingly the perpetrators, women were disproportionately targets, and male dominance
(or patriarchy) was the explanation. By the mid-1990s, legal theory and social
research had expanded the concept of sexual harassment in two ways: by incorporating the
sexual harassment of men (by other men) or same-sex sexual harassment and by enlarging
the concept of “gender harassment” to include words and deeds that disparaged and violated
women and “non-masculine” men. We believe that the concept that explains male
disparagement both of women and of men who are, or may appear to be, gay is hegemonic
masculinity. As we have argued, bullying paradigms cannot explain the categorical nature
of the perpetrator–victim dynamics that are played out on a daily level in workplaces and
at schools across the world. Indeed, the “bully lens” may blind researchers, policy makers,
and citizens to the obvious gendered nature of high-profile crimes (e.g., see Kimmel &
Mahler, 2003, for an analysis of perpetrators and victims of school shootings). Our research
revealed the distinctly gendered nature of peer victimization in two ways: Boys were overwhelmingly
the perpetrators, though girls and boys had fairly similar victimization rates,
and girls experienced more adverse school outcomes and greater distress than boys.
But what about bullying? Does bullying not have an impact on children’s lives? We
are not suggesting that sexual harassment causes harm, whereas bullying does not. There 
128 Violence Against Women 22(1)
is considerable evidence both in research and in the everyday accounts of school life
among adolescents about the pernicious effects of bullying. We are suggesting, instead,
that definitions and measures of bullying cover a broader range of behaviors than sexual
harassment. And this is both a strength and a weakness of scientific and popular conceptions
of bullying. The strength of “bullying” is that it presents a snapshot of the toxic
brew of words and deeds that are part and parcel of everyday life for adolescents in
America and includes racist, sexist, and homophobic slurs along with pejorative comments
about weight, physical attractiveness, competence, and other personal characteristics.
The weakness of “bullying” is what Brown and her colleagues (2007) referred to
as “the tyranny of sameness.” Taunts about one’s physical appearance or social incompetence,
for example, are not distinguished from racist, homophobic, or sexist taunts.
We feel that sexual harassment theory and more generally the concept of hegemonic
masculinity have several important applications with regard to our findings.
There is a significant research literature that documents the harm that peer victimization
(bullying and/or harassment) causes to children’s well-being. This article adds to
the growing body of work on the impact of victimization, especially sexual harassment,
on school attachment and performance. Although the impact on children’s well-being
may be regarded as health issues, the effects of victimization described in this article
fall under the rubric of organizational climate problems. We would urge researchers and
school administrators to think of the outcomes of climate problems that adults experience
at work—high turnover and absenteeism rates, low morale, poor productivity, and
suspicion of coworkers and supervisors (see, for example, Fitzgerald, Drasgow, Hulin,
Gelfand, & Magley, 1997; Willness, Steel, & Lee, 2007) as applicable to children at
school. Although adolescents may underachieve, feel detached from teachers, or think
about quitting school for a number of reasons (e.g., rapid changes in physical appearance,
adjustment to a new school, family troubles), peer victimization, especially sexual
harassment, should be thought of as not merely as something that happens at school but
as a phenomenon that erodes the climate of a school. An example of this is a recent study,
which found that frequent and severe experiences of sexual harassment not only had
direct adverse effects on children’s well-being but also caused harm indirectly by creating
a climate where children believed that sexual harassment was tolerated by teachers
and school administrators (Ormerod et al., 2007). The concept of hegemonic masculinity
also has important implications in terms of our findings. In particular, hegemonic masculinity
accounts for the sharp imbalance in perpetration that we and others have documented.
Males are bullies and harassers much more frequently than females. It also
accounts for our finding that sexual harassment more so than bullying causes distress,
especially for girls. We believe that the concept of hegemonic masculinity extends to
other research that documented the adverse impact of homophobic slurs on boys’ wellbeing
(Poteat & Espelage, 2007; Swearer et al., 2008). The bully/sexual violence pathway
(Espelage et al., 2011) appears to have relevance to our study, albeit indirectly.
According to their findings, bullying behavior in fifth grade predicted sexual violence/
sexual harassment in eighth grade, or according to the authors, “. . . traditional bullying
perpetration transform[ed] into more gendered harassment and aggressive behavior in
the form of homophobic teasing and sexual harassment” (Espelage et al., 2011, p. 64). 
Gruber and Fineran 129
Based on our findings about the greater role of sexual harassment in eroding school
attachment and academic performance, we speculate that this pathway is the result of
children learning more powerful ways to establish social dominance. In their ethnographic
study of a summer camp, McGuffey and Rich (1999) discovered that children
as young as 10 were already quite well versed in the practice of hegemonic masculinity:
Athletic and competitive males established a hierarchy where they were at the top,
while “non-masculine” boys (who cried easily or played with girls) and most girls were
marginalized and stigmatized. Although other research has shown the increasing frequency
of sexual harassment compared with bullying as children progress through
school, our research has added information on the gravity of this change for adolescents’
attachment to school and their ability to perform well.
This study’s outcomes lead us back to the larger, more general issue of whether
schools should be promoting anti-bullying programs over sexual harassment prevention
education. The prominence of bullying as a school issue in public discourse as
well as debates on the content of anti-bullying legislation progressing through many
state legislatures prompted the Federal government to step in recently and offer a
“course correction” of sorts. By advising schools to be mindful of behaviors that are
labeled as “bullying” but are in fact legally “sexual harassment,” the U.S. Department
of Education emphasized what a number of researchers had argued for years: that
sexual harassment involves words and deeds that are distinct from what is generally
considered to constitute bullying. Refocusing public discourse and reminding school
officials and parents of the protections already afforded to children by sexual harassment
laws (embedded in civil rights legislation) would, among other things, prevent
mislabeling from occurring on the wide scale as it does currently. As the number of
studies that address bullying prevention programs reveals, it is becoming clear that
such programs do not curtail sexual harassment perpetration (Espelage et al., 2011).
Stein and Mennemeier (2011) summarize the issue as such: “Talking about bullying is
not an inoculation against sexual harassment/violence and, likewise, talking about bullying
without talking about homophobia will not prevent homophobic conduct which
may be the pathway to sexual harassment/violence conduct” (p. 5).
A cursory examination of Internet news articles noting adolescent suicides since
2011 when the “Dear Colleague” letter was issued confirms no change. Articles
describing students sexually harassed at school are still described as students being
bullied to death. Again, we can only speculate as to whether or not school personnel
would have been more proactive if the abuse had been labeled properly as a civil rights
violation (sexual harassment) rather than as an unfortunate “bullying” experience.
This study’s outcomes hopefully point us in the direction of determining whether
schools should be promoting anti-bullying programs over sexual harassment prevention
education. The stakes are too high to ignore.
Limitations
This study was based on data drawn from three school districts in two states. A larger
sample that included more students from a greater variety of schools would have added
confidence to our results. The fact that our results parallel those of other researchers 
130 Violence Against Women 22(1)
who have used the same measures of peer victimization does provide evidence of
generalizability. A larger sample would also have enabled us to study the individual
bullying and sexual harassment items in greater detail, especially those of a more serious
nature (e.g., girls who are the victims of sexual rumors or boys who are physically
threatened and attacked). “Bullying” and “sexual harassment” are terms that encompass
a broad range of behaviors and experiences. It would be useful for researchers,
policy analysts, and school administrators to know which types of bullying or harassment
experiences are especially serious and have aversive impacts on the well-being
of adolescents.
M/SD 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
1. Gradesa 3.6 (1.8) —
2. School satisfactionb 2.9 (1.7) .36 —
3. Teacher support 3.1 (1.8) .33 .25 —
4. Academic engagement 4.9 (2.5) .41 .37 .46 —
5. School withdrawal 3.3 (1.9) 36 .34 .29 .45 —
6. Bullying Scale 3.4 (2.4) .17 .20 .12 .26 .31 —
7. Sexual Harassment Scale 2.7 (1.9) .23 .28 .17 .26 .41 .55 —
8. Age 14.8 (1.3) .13 .05 .08 .11 .13 .03 .04 —
9. Bully × Gender 6.7 (7.8) .20 .25 .13 .24 .27 .82 .54 .01 —
10. SH × Gender 5.3 (7.2) .23 .29 .18 .26 .28 .75 .88 .06 .63 —
a
Correlations (Pearson’s r) in italics are significant at p < .01. bMinimum and maximum scale values are 1-7 for grades, school satisfaction, teacher support, and school
withdrawal; 1-9 for academic withdrawal; and 0-10 for bullying and sexual harassment preponderance.
Appendix A
Means, Standard Deviations, and Intercorrelations.
Predictors
Outcomes
School
satisfaction
Teacher
support
Academic
engagement
School
withdrawal Grades
Gendera .198 (.15)** .152 (.18)** .208 (.22)** .069 (.17) .155 (.17)*
SexHar .234 (.02)* .132 (.02)** .197 (.02)** .275 (.02)** .189 (.02)**
Gender × SH .121 (.12)** .098 (.20)* .162 (.21)** .075 (.21) .096 (.21)*
Gender .170 (.17)** .141 (.20)** .167 (.24)** .084 (.19) .174 (.18)**
Bullying .092 (.15)* .082 (.02)* .220 (.03)** .145 (.02) .065 (.17)
Gender × Bully .094 (.02)* .076 (.22) .097 (.24)* .110 (.03)* .132 (.02)**
a
Regression (beta) coefficients are presented for each relationship. Standard errors are in parentheses.
*p < .05 **p < .01.
Appendix B
Relationships Between Bullying, Sexual Harassment, and Gender.
Gruber and Fineran 131
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship,
and/or publication of this article: Funding for this project came from the Campus Grants
Committee at the University of Michigan-Dearborn and a Faculty Senate Grant from the
University of Southern Maine.
Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of
this article.
Note
1. Respondents were offered three response categories to describe their perpetrators: a boy or
mostly boys, a girl or mostly girls, both boys and girls. Boys were the majority of perpetrators
for 9 of the 10 bullying items and 13 of the 14 sexual harassment items. Girls were the
majority (52%) of perpetrators for “Excluded you from your group of friends” (bullying
item). Also, a slightly larger number of girls than boys (46% vs. 44%) were described as
the perpetrators for the sexual harassment item, “Spread sexual rumors about you.”
References
American Association of University Women Educational Foundation. (1993). Hostile hallways:
The AAUW survey on sexual harassment in American schools (Research Report No.
923012). Washington, DC: Harris/Scholastic Research.
American Association of University Women Educational Foundation. (2001). Hostile hallways:
Bullying, teasing and sexual harassment in school. Washington, DC: Author.
Basile, K., Espelage, D., Rivers, I., McMahon, P., & Simon, T. (2009). The theoretical and
empirical links between bullying behavior and male sexual violence perpetration.
Aggression and Violent Behavior, 14, 336-347.
Belsley, D., Kuh, E., & Welsch, R. (1980). Regression diagnostics: Identifying influential data
and sources of collinearity. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bowen, G., & Richman, J. (1995). The school success profile. Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina.
Brown, L., Chesney-Lind, M., & Stein, N. (2007). Patriarchy matters: Toward a gendered theory
of teen violence and victimization. Violence Against Women, 13, 1249-1273.
Corbett, K., Gentry, C., & Pearson, W. (1993). Sexual harassment in high school. Youth &
Society, 25, 93-103.
DeSouza, E., & Ribeiros, J. (2005). Bullying and sexual harassment among Brazilian high
school students. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 20, 1018-1038.
Eslea, M., Menesini, M., Moore, A., & Morita, Y. (2004). Friendship and loneliness among bullies
and victims: Data from seven countries. Aggressive Behavior, 30, 71-83.
Espelage, D., Basile, K., & Hamburger, M. (2011). Bullying perpetration and subsequent sexual
violence perpetration among middle school students. Journal of Adolescent Health, 50, 60-65.
Espelage, D., & Holt, M. (2001). Bullying and victimization during early adolescence: Peer influences
and psychosocial correlates. In R. Geffner & M. Loring (Eds.), Bullying behavior:
Current issues, research, and intervention (pp. 132-142). Binghamton, NY: Haworth Press.
Fineran, S. (2002). Sexual minority students and peer sexual harassment in high school. Journal
of School Social Work, 11, 50-69.
132 Violence Against Women 22(1)
Fineran, S., & Bennett, L. (1999). Gender and power issues of peer sexual harassment among
teenagers. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 14, 626-641.
Fitzgerald, L., Drasgow, F., Hulin, C., Gelfand, M., & Magley, V. (1997). Antecedents and
consequences of sexual harassment in organizations: A test of an integrated model. Journal
of Applied Psychology, 82, 578-589.
Fitzgerald, L., & Shullman, S. (1993). Sexual harassment: A research analysis and agenda for
the 1990’s. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 42, 5-27.
Franke, K. (1997). What’s wrong with sexual harassment? Stanford Law Review, 49, 691-772.
Gruber, J. (1990). Methodological problems and policy implications in sexual harassment
research. Population Research and Policy Review, 9, 235-254.
Gruber, J., & Fineran, S. (2007). The impact of bullying and sexual harassment on middle
school and high school girls. Violence Against Women, 13,627-643.
Gruber, J., & Fineran, S. (2008). Comparing the impact of bullying and sexual harassment victimization
on the mental and physical health of adolescents. Sex Roles, 19, 1-13.
Hand, J., & Sanchez, L. (2000). Badgering or bantering? Gender differences in experience of,
and reactions to, sexual harassment among U.S. high school students. Gender & Society,
14, 718-746.
Hanisch, K., & Hulin, C. (1991). General attitudes and organizational withdrawal: An evaluation
of a causal model. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 39, 110-128.
Hill, C., & Kearl, H. (2011). Crossing the line: Sexual harassment at school. Washington, D.C.:
American Association of University Women.
Holt, M., & Espelage, D. (2007). A cluster analytic investigation of victimization among high
school students: Are profiles differentially associated with psychological symptoms and
school belonging? In C. Maher, J. Zins, & M. Elias (Eds.), Bullying, victimization, and peer
harassment (pp. 248-261). New York: Haworth Press.
Katz-Wise, S., & Hyde, J. (2012). Victimization experiences of lesbian, gay, and bisexual individuals:
A meta-analysis. Journal of Sex Research, 49, 142-161.
Kimmel, M., & Mahler, M. (2003). Adolescent masculinity, homophobia, and violence: Random
school shootings, 1982-2000. American Behavioral Scientist, 46, 1439-1458.
Klein, J. (2006). Sexuality and school shootings: What role does teasing play in school massacres?
Journal of Homosexuality, 51, 39-62.
Leaper, C., & Brown, C. S. (2008). Perceived experiences with sexism among adolescent girls.
Child Development, 79, 685-704.
MacKinnon, C. (1979). Sexual harassment of working women. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
McGuffey, C., & Rich, M. (1999). Playing in the gender transgression zone: Race, class, and
hegemonic masculinity in middle school. Gender & Society, 13, 608-627.
McMaster, L., Connolly, J., Pepler, D., & Craig, W. (2002). Peer to peer sexual harassment in early
adolescence: A developmental perspective. Development and Psychopathology, 14, 91-105.
Morgan, P., & Gruber, J. (2011). Sexual harassment: Violence against women at work and in
schools. In C. Renzetti, J. Edleson, & R. Bergen (Eds.), Sourcebook on violence against
women (pp. 75-92). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Nansel, T., Overpeck, R., Pilla, W., Ruan, P., Scheidt, K., & Simons-Morton, B. (2001). Bullying
behaviors among US youth: Prevalence and association with psychological adjustment.
Journal of the American Medical Association, 285, 2094-2100.
Norusis, M. (2004). SPSS 13.0 Advanced statistical procedures companion. Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Olweus, D. (1978). Aggression in the school: Bullies and whipping boys. Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Olweus, D. (1993). Bullying at school. Oxford, UK: Basil Blackwell.
Gruber and Fineran 133
Ormerod, A. J., Collinsworth, L. L., & Perry, L. A. (2007). Critical climate: Relations among
sexual harassment, climate, and outcomes for high school girls and boys. Psychology of
Women Quarterly, 32, 113-125.
Pelligrini, A. (2001). A longitudinal study of heterosexual relationships, aggression and sexual
harassment during the transition from primary school through middle school. Applied
Developmental Psychology, 27, 119-133.
Peskin, M., Tortolero, S., & Markham, C. (2006). Bullying and victimization among Black and
Hispanic adolescents. Adolescence, 41, 467-484.
Poteat, V., & Espelage, D. (2007). Predicting psychosocial consequences of homophobic victimization
in middle school students. Journal of Early Adolescence, 27, 175-191.
Robinson, K. (2005). Reinforcing hegemonic masculinities through sexual harassment: Issues
of identity, power, and popularity in secondary schools. Gender and Education, 17, 19-37.
Schneider, K., Swan, S., & Fitzgerald, L. (1998). Job-related and psychological effects of sexual
harassment in the workplace. Journal of Applied Psychology, 82, 401-415.
Skues, J., Cunningham, E., & Pokharel, T. (2005). The influence of bullying behaviors on sense
of school connectedness, motivation and self-esteem. Australian Journal of Guidance &
Counselling, 15, 17-26.
Stein, N. (2003). Bullying or sexual harassment? The missing discourse of rights in an era of
zero tolerance. Arizona Law Review, 45, 783-799.
Stein, N., & Mennemeier, K. (2011, October). Addressing the gendered dimensions of harassment
and bullying: What domestic and sexual violence advocates need to know [Critical
issue brief]. Washington DC: National Resource Center on Domestic Violence & National
Sexual Violence Resource Center.
Swan, S., & Wyer, R. (1997). Gender stereotypes and social identity: How being in the minority
affects judgments of self and others. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23, 1265-1276.
Swearer, S., Turner, R., Givens, J., & Pollack, W. (2008). “You’re so gay!” Do different forms
of bullying matter for adolescent males? School Psychology Review, 37, 160-175.
Trigg, M., & Wittenstrom, K. (1996). That’s the way the world goes: Sexual harassment and
New Jersey teenagers. Initiatives: Special Issue—Sexual Harassment, 57, 55-65.
U.S. Department of Education, Office for Civil Rights. (2010, October 26). Dear colleague letter—Bullying
and sexual harassment. Available from: http://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/
list/oct/letters/colleague-201010.html
U.S. Merit Systems Protection Board. (1988). Sexual harassment in the federal workplace: An
update. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Williams, T., Connolly, J., Pepler, D., & Craig, W. (2005). Peer victimization, social support,
and psychosocial adjustment of sexual minority adolescents. Journal of Youth and
Adolescence, 34, 471-482.
Willness, C., Steel, P., & Lee, K. (2007). A meta-analysis of the antecedents and consequences
of workplace sexual harassment. Personnel Psychology, 60, 127-162.
Author Biographies
James Gruber is Frances R. Cousens Collegiate professor of Sociology. He has published
research on workplace and school sexual harassment since the mid-1980’s.
Susan Fineran is professor of Social Work and Women and Gender Studies at the University of
Southern Maine. She has published on school sexual harassment since 1995. Her current research
focus concerns gender violence and she has been the recipient of two grant awards (2009 and
2013) from the U.S. Department of Justice, Office on Violence Against Women, Grants to
Reduce Sexual Assault, Domestic Violence, Dating Violence, and Stalking on Campus Program.