Aggression and Violent Behavior 22 (2015) 1–8
    Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Aggression and Violent Behavior
  Three prevention studies ongoing in Germany and Switzerland enrolling psychiatric patients at high risk for violence and compulsory hospitalization: Comparing aims, designs and methods
Christian Luckhaus a,⁎, Barbara Lay b, Nicole Frommann a, Birgit Janssen a, Joachim Nitschke c
a DepartmentofPsychiatryandPsychotherapy,MedicalFaculty,HeinrichHeineUniversityDüsseldorf,Germany
b DepartmentofPsychiatry,PsychotherapyandPsychosomatics,UniversityHospitalofPsychiatryZurich,Switzerland c ClinicforForensicPsychiatry,DistrictHospitalofAnsbach,Germany
         article info
Article history:
Received 5 February 2014
Received in revised form 12 January 2015 Accepted 27 February 2015
Available online 7 March 2015
Keywords:
Severe mental illness Schizophrenia
Prevention
Outpatient intervention Compulsory hospitalization Violence
Contents
abstract
Over the past decades, reductions of hospital beds and lengths of stay in general psychiatry are opposed to in- creases in detention cases and times in forensic psychiatric institutions. These developments raise the issue of trans-institutionalization of patient subgroups, whose particular needs of support are less accommodated by ra- tionalized general psychiatry. While forensic psychiatric aftercare with a focus on risk assessment and assertive treatment has been largely established, preventive care of high-risk psychiatric patients to avert delinquency, compulsory hospitalization, or forensic courses has not yet been developed. Three outpatient studies addressing these issues have been conceptualized independently and were initiated in Germany and Switzerland. All three have similar study endpoints regarding incidence of violence, delinquency, compulsory hospitalization, and forensific sequelae. However, designs and methods differ with regard to inclusion criteria, assessment methods, foci of interventions, modes of delivering care, degrees of assertiveness, and times of follow-up. By the time of study completions, it can be expected that the joined information from all three studies will allow for a compre- hensive appraisal of preventive treatment strategies and approaches in high-risk patients. In this paper, the study designs and methods of the three trials are outlined.
© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
     1. Introduction .............................................................. 2 2. Delineationofongoingstudies ...................................................... 3 2.1. Psychoeducational intervention program to reduce compulsory hospital readmission in the Canton of Zurich, Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . 3
2.1.1. Background ....................................................... 3
2.1.2. Aims .......................................................... 3
2.1.3. Typeofstudy ...................................................... 3
2.1.4. Typeofintervention ................................................... 3
2.1.5. Studysubjects ...................................................... 3
2.1.6. Assessments..............................................
. . . . .
. . . . .
. . . . . .
⁎ Correspondingauthorat:DepartmentofPsychiatryandPsychotherapy,MedicalFaculty,HeinrichHeineUniversityDüsseldorf,BergischeLandstraße2,40629Düsseldorf,Germany. Tel.: +49 211 922 2741; fax: +49 211 922 2745.
E-mail address: Christian.Luckhaus@lvr.de (C. Luckhaus).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.avb.2015.02.007
1359-1789/© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
2.1.7. Dataanalysis.............................................. 2.2. Preventive Forensic Assertive Community Care of the District Hospital of Ansbach (PFACTA), State of Bavaria, Germany . .
. . 3 . . 3 . . 5
. . . .
2.2.1. Background ....................................................... 5
2.2.2. Aims .......................................................... 5
2.2.3. Typeofstudy ...................................................... 5
2.2.4. Typeofintervention ................................................... 5
2.2.5. Studysubjects ...................................................... 5
2.2.6. Assessments....................................................... 5
2.2.7. Dataanalysis....................................................... 5
 
2
2.3.
C. Luckhaus et al. / Aggression and Violent Behavior 22 (2015) 1–8
Complex-therapeutic outpatient intervention for preventing endangering behavior in psychotic patients in the city of Düsseldorf, StateofNorth-Rhine-Westphalia,Germany .............................................. 5
2.3.1. Background ....................................................... 5
2.3.2. Aims........................................................... 5
2.3.3. Typeofstudy....................................................... 5
2.3.4. Typeofintervention.................................................... 5
2.3.5. Studysubjects ...................................................... 6
2.3.6. Assessments ....................................................... 6
2.3.7. Dataanalysis....................................................... 6
3. Discussion ............................................................... 6 4. Conclusion ............................................................... 7 References . . . ............................................................... 7
 1. Introduction
Over the past 40 years, reforms in general psychiatry have induced marked deinstitutionalization in favor of social and community-based psychiatric care in many countries (Kramp & Gabrielsen, 2009). Addi- tionally, rationalizations in hospital services have led to reductions of hospital beds and lengths of stay (Doenisch-Seidel et al., 2007; Schanda, Stompe, & Ortwein-Swoboda, 2010) At the same time, there is an appar- ent tendency of a subgroup of severely ill psychiatric patients to be discharged into the community despite persistently high symptom load, low levels of social functioning, and proneness to violence (Hodgins, Mueller-Isberner, & Allaire, 2006; Schanda et al., 2010). These developments coincide with a continuous rise of detention cases and times in forensic psychiatric institutions (Schanda et al., 2010). While the interrelation of opposing general and forensic psychi- atric developments is likely to be multidimensional, possibly involving independent, e.g., justiciable factors (Schanda et al., 2010), the critical issue of trans-institutionalization has been raised (Habermeyer, Wolff, Gillner, Strohm, & Kutscher, 2010). A subgroup of severely mentally ill patients, among them schizophrenia patients with complex problems reaching from treatment resistance to noncompliance and comorbidi- ties, does not seem to be sufficiently reached by general-psychiatric services. As a consequence, these patients tend to enter unfavorable courses of illness and are, thus, more prone to precarity and delinquency (Kutscher, Schiffer, & Seifert, 2009). They carry an increased risk of be- coming forensic cases or, prior to that, become the subject of involun- tary hospitalizations in general psychiatry. Being hospitalized against their will bears the risk of further worsening these patients' attitudes to treatment and psychiatric services in general. It may lead to a delete- rious circle of treatment discontinuation and involuntary readmission (Jaeger et al., 2013).
To counteract such developments, and to better reach the severely mentally ill in the community, intensified ways of delivering social and psychiatric care have been initiated. On the one hand, there are treatment approaches on a voluntary basis, such as intensive case man- agement (ICM; Dieterich, Irving, Park, & Marshall, 2011) and assertive community treatment regimes (ACT; Lambert et al., 2010; Brugha et al., 2012). On the other hand, there are compulsory outpatient com- mitments that are issued by legal orders at the point of discharge from involuntary hospital treatment (Burns et al., 2013; Steadman et al., 2001; Swartz et al., 2001). Dieterich et al. concluded in their meta- analysis of 24 trials that ICM, comprising small caseloads and high in- tensity therapeutic input, reduced hospitalization and increased reten- tion in care of the severely mentally ill, when compared to standard community care. ICM was, however, not associated with a change in contacts with the legal system. Interestingly, the more ICM was adher- ent to the ACT model, the better it was at decreasing time in hospital. According to Lambert et al. key features of ACT are a multidisciplinary team approach with a small client/staff ratio, high-frequent treatment contacts with 60–70% of interventions provided in the community
setting, a “no drop-out policy”, and a 24 h a day availability including crisis intervention. When using this regime in patients with schizophre- nia spectrum disorders, they found that ACT, as compared to standard community care, was associated with a reduced rate and time to service disengagement and with larger improvements of symptoms, illness se- verity, global functioning, quality of life, and client satisfaction. Brugha et al. (2012) found in their survey on the outcome of assertive outreach (AO) across England that, under AO, the time spent in hospital de- creased. Furthermore, the effectiveness of joint crisis plans for people with psychosis has been evaluated in several controlled trials. While re- sults clearly suggested improvement of therapeutic relationships, con- flicting results have been reported as to their potential to reduce compulsory hospitalization (Henderson et al., 2004; Papageorgiou, King, Janmohamed, Davidson, & Dawson, 2002; Thornicroft et al., 2013).
The outcomes of compulsory outpatient approaches appear less fa- vorable: An outpatient commitment program conducted in New York showed no significant difference of the court-ordered group regarding psychiatric rehospitalization (Steadman et al., 2001). In an outpatient commitment trial conducted in North Carolina, control and outpatient commitment groups also did not differ significantly regarding hospital outcomes. However, it is interesting to note that in patients with psy- choses, outpatient commitment reduced hospital admissions when combined with a higher intensity of outpatient treatment (Swartz et al., 1999, 2001). In a large outpatient commitment study in the State of New York, Phelan et al. (2010) studied different endpoints not only in schizophrenia patients, but also in people with schizoaffective disorder, bipolar disorder, and major depression. They found positive ef- fects of assisted outpatient treatment on several self-reported items, among them serious violent behavior, suicide risk, and social function- ing, and attributed them to the enhanced service package and not to legal coercion per se. However, a very recent comparison of community treatment orders (CTOs) vs. “leave of absence under Section 17 of the Act” following involuntary hospitalizations again yielded negative re- sults: Despite more than three-fold increased time spent under commu- nity care in the CTO group vs. the Section 17 group, rates of readmission, time spent in hospital, clinical and social outcomes were unchanged (Burns et al., 2013).
The convergence of evidence in the above studies suggests, but does not prove, that intensifying outpatient care delivery to the subgroup of difficult-to-reach severely mentally ill patients may be effective in re- ducing rehospitalization. Evidence appears equivocal between studies regarding the improvement of clinical symptoms, but more concordant for improving social functioning (Lambert et al., 2010; Phelan et al., 2010). Outpatient treatments in this clientele seem to work better if they are voluntary rather than compulsory, and if they include en- hanced service features like multi-professional case-management, home treatment, out of hours services. It is unclear, however, which particular treatment modality or combination is effective, and whether treatment effects apply to the total of the severely mentally ill or to cer- tain subgroups. There is also no firm knowledge, whether the above
outpatient interventions can avert unfavorable courses of illness and its sequelae, such as precarity, delinquency, violence, and forensic devel- opments. There are some indications that a subgroup of schizophrenia patients with lack of insight into illness, non-compliance, and comor- bidities needs to be specifically addressed with particular regard to their sense of coercion (Jaeger et al., 2013) and an emphasis on psychoeducation (Xia, Merinder, & Begamwar, 2013). Little is known about specific outpatient needs of other diagnostic groups among the difficult-to-reach severely mentally ill.
Facing the paucity of evidence, three research groups in Germany and Switzerland started independent prospective community treat- ment programs with different designs and interventions for difficult- to-reach and high-risk-of-violence psychiatric subjects. Their common denominator is the study of intensified and specified outpatient care de- livery as to its feasibility and possible effects on diverse endpoints, such as rates of hospitalization, violence, delinquency, clinical symptoms and social functions. All studies have been rolled-out and are currently on- going. In the following the studies will be delineated as to their corre- sponding settings, designs, and methods (Table 1).
2. Delineation of ongoing studies
2.1. Psychoeducational intervention program to reduce compulsory hospital readmission in the Canton of Zurich, Switzerland
2.1.1. Background
In Switzerland high numbers of involuntary placement of people with mental disorders have been reported in comparison to other European countries (Salize & Dressing, 2004) which constitute a major public health issue. In the Canton of Zurich, a catchment area of 1.4 mil- lion inhabitants, the annual quotas of involuntary admissions amount to some 25% of all psychiatric inpatient admissions (Lay, Nordt, & Rössler, 2011). In light of the ethical, health care organizational, and political rel- evance of this problem, the need for innovative interventions to im- prove the current situation has frequently been advocated. Various efforts have been directed to integrate mentally disordered patients into the complex system of mental health services: These efforts range from empowerment (Henderson et al., 2009; Kim et al., 2007; Papageorgiou et al., 2002) to psycho-education (Bäuml et al., 2007; Krischke, 2006) or preventive measures targeting the “continuity of care”. These approaches are considered promising and helpful in en- hancing compliance with psychiatric treatment programs, thus possibly reducing involuntary inpatient episodes, costs and transfers of patients to the criminal justice system. However, there has been only scarce evidence of the effectiveness of such efforts in terms of more robust outcome criteria (e.g., significant reduction of admission rates, cost- effectiveness).
2.1.2. Aims
The current study aims to analyze the effectiveness of an innovative intervention program for patients at high risk of compulsory admission to psychiatric hospitals. This intervention program targets the reduction of the number of compulsory hospitalizations (primary outcome criteri- on). Moreover, it intends to reduce the degree of patients' perceived co- ercion and to increase patients' empowerment, social role functioning, and quality of life (secondary outcome criteria).
2.1.3. Type of study
This intervention program is implemented as a sub-project within the framework of the Zurich Programme for Sustainable Development of Mental Health Services (ZInEP). The study is currently conducted at four psychiatric hospitals mandated to provide psychiatric care to adult patients in the Canton of Zurich, Switzerland. In a prospective con- trolled trial of 118 patients each has been assigned to the intervention group or to the control group. Control modality participants receive treatment as usual.
2.1.4. Type of intervention
The intervention program and the design of the study are described in detail elsewhere (Lay et al., 2012). In brief, the intervention program consists of: (a) individualized psycho-education (1–3 instruction ses- sions) focusing on behaviors prior to and during an illness related crisis, (b) the distribution of an individualized crisis card and, after discharge from psychiatry, (c) a 24-month preventive monitoring.
During the monitoring, each patient is contacted every fourth week by telephone. At each contact, the present status of the study participant is assessed using an individual checklist covering risk factors of relapse (e.g., familial, work, or financial problems), information on treatment- related behavior and mental health service use as well as personal and social resources. All interventions are provided by a personal mental health care worker (psychologist) who maintains the contact to the study participant over the course of the whole study.
This program primarily addresses the self-management skills of chronically mentally ill patients. It is designed as a supplementary inter- vention (supplementary to patients' regular therapy) to give chronically mentally ill patients individual support to become more actively in- volved in their care. Preventive monitoring enables detection of early signs of a crisis or of a threatening relapse. It offers opportunities to refer to the patients' individual crisis card and to ways of optimized ser- vice use in case of a relapse.
2.1.5. Study subjects
The study sample was recruited from a naturalistic user sample of inpatient mental health care in the four study centers. Included are pa- tients who have been compulsorily admitted to psychiatry at least once during the past 24 months, aged 18–65 years, residing in the Canton of Zurich and able and willing to consent. Participation is not limited to a specific mental disorder. To be included in the study, patients must not have been diagnosed with an ICD-10 F0, F5, or F7–F9 diagnosis. Moreover, individuals who cannot be contacted by telephone were not eligible for inclusion.
2.1.6. Assessments
Detailed assessments are made in all study subjects at the point of discharge from index hospital stay (baseline), and at 12 and 24 months after baseline. Data are gathered by means of structured face-to-face in- terviews and standardized questionnaires. Assessments include clinical data (psychopathology BPRS; Lukoff, Nuechterlein, & Ventura, 1986, CGI, GAF), risk of self-harm or threat to others (HCR-20; Webster, Douglas, Eaves, & Hart, 1997, PCL-SV; Hart, Cox, & Hare, 1995), as well as data on sociodemographics and service use (voluntary and involun- tary inpatient episodes, prison terms, use of outpatient psychiatric care or other services during follow-up; CSSRI-EU; Chisolm et al., 2000). Fur- thermore, several constructs of patients' subjective perceptions are assessed: perceived coercion (MacArthur AES; Lidz et al., 1995), empow- erment (Empowerment-Scale; Rogers, Chamberlin, Ellison, & Crean, 1997), treatment satisfaction (CSQ-8; Attkisson & Zwick, 1982), quality of life (WHO-Qol-Bref; Angermeyer, Kilian, & Matschinger, 2000), social support (BSSS; Schulz & Schwarzer, 2003), and stigma of mental illness.
2.1.7. Data analysis
To evaluate the effectiveness of the intervention program, all major endpoints of the study will be compared between the intervention and the control group. Primary outcome of the study is the time in hos- pital accumulated over all involuntary inpatient stays during the 24 month period. This outcome criterion will be analyzed in terms of both, ‘time in hospital’ and ‘health care costs’. As further endpoints of the study, changes in the perspective of the patients (secondary out- come criteria) will be compared.
Moreover the study seeks to identify individual and social factors that influence primary and secondary outcomes. Characteristics on the patient level (such as treatment history, diagnosis, social network) will be used to analyze a possible association with the major endpoints.
C. Luckhaus et al. / Aggression and Violent Behavior 22 (2015) 1–8 3
4 C. Luckhaus et al. / Aggression and Violent Behavior 22 (2015) 1–8
  Table 1
Synopsis of ongoing studies. Study center
Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany
University Hospital of Psychiatry Zurich, Switzerland; The Zu- rich Program for Sustainable Development of Mental Health Services (ZInEP)
Preventing Compulsory Admission to Psychiatric Inpatient Care using Psychoeducation and Monitoring
Clinic for Forensic Psychiatry, District Hospital of Ansbach, Germany
Title of study
Prevention of Endangering Behavior in Psychotic Patients by Treatment Optimization Using an Outpatient Complex-Therapeutic Intervention
PsychPrev
Preventive Forensic Assertive Community Care at the District Hospital of Ansbach
Acronym/short title Catchment area
City of Düsseldorf for intervention group,
City of Cologne for control group
Non-randomized controlled intervention trial Consecutive screening of all cases of civil commitment, voluntary study inclusion at end of placement, if inclusion criteria are met and informed consent is provided
Preventing compulsory admission Canton of Zurich
PFACTA
Region of Ansbach for intervention group,
Region of Erlangen for control group
Non-randomized controlled intervention trial
Information about study program systematically provided to the public, clinicians and private practitioners. Self-referrals or referrals by clinicians/practitioners are included, if inclusion criteria are met and informed consent is provided
Persons with a raised risk profile for violence who are diagnosed as pre-psychotic or suffering from schizophrenia, severe personality disorder or severe paraphilia
Type of study
Mode of recruitment
Randomized controlled intervention trial
Screening of patients admitted to one of four psychiatric hospitals for fulfilling inclusion criteria; after provision of informed consent, the patients at each center are assigned consecutively at random to either the intervention or the control group
Users of inpatient mental health care who have been compulsorily admitted to psychiatry at least once during the past 24 months; age 18–65; participation is not restricted to a specific mental disorder (excluded: ICD10 diagnoses F0, F5, F7–9) Individualized psychoeducation focusing on behavior prior to and during illness-related crisis; distribution of a personal crisis card; preventive monitoring of individual risk factors of relapse or compulsory re-admission every fourth week by telephone. All measures are provided by a mental health care worker who maintains personal contact to the patient over the whole course of study
N = 118 patients randomized to the intervention group
24 months
N = 118 patients randomized to the control group
Study subjects
General-psychiatric patients with psychotic disorders and civil commitment because of endangerment; age 18–65; stratifications for schizophrenia spectrum: manic psychoses (9:1), male: female gender (6:4)
Type of intervention
Complex-therapeutic outpatient intervention adapted to individual needs and acceptance of participants comprising psychiatric, psychotherapeutic and social-therapeutic treatment and support modules; interlinking case management, multidisciplinary staff, shared case load; assertive engagement, contingency plan; extended hours, hospital-linked 24 h crisis management
Combination of forensic risk assessments, outreach assistance (home visits) and outpatient treatment with the options of psychotherapy, pharmacotherapy and group therapies (e.g. R&R, SOTP; no drop-out policy; use of mobile telecommunications (calls, text messages) to increase adherence and compliance
Size of intervention group Duration of intervention Comparison group
N = 79 patients to be included in intervention
6 months
(1) Matched general-psychiatric outpatients in a different catchment area receiving treatment as usual
(2) Study decliners
Immediately pre- and post-intervention as well as 6 months post intervention
Routine administrative data on hospitalizations; semi-standardized interviews to obtain extended information on sociobiography, clinical and forensic history, standardized ratings of psychopathology, forensic risk and social functioning; neuropsychological test battery; assessments of service use, compliance, adherence, and treatment costs
Rate of compulsory rehospitalizations in general psychiatry
N = 80–120 patients to be included to intervention Up to 48 months
Matched general-psychiatric outpatients in a different catchment area receiving treatment as usual
Time of assessments and follow-up Types of assessment
Upon discharge from hospital prior to monitoring as well as after 12 and 24 months of monitoring
Comprehensive assessments by means of (structured) face-to-face interviews and questionnaires of psychopathology, risk of self-harm or threat to others, sociodemographic data, service use, and patients' subjective perceptions (perceived coercion, empowerment, treatment satisfaction, quality of life, social support, stigma)
Upon referral until the anticipated end of the study in Feb 2016
Primary outcome measure
Number of compulsory admissions to psychiatric hospital treatment and time in hospital in connection with compulsory inpatient episodes
(effectiveness and cost-effectiveness)
Future aggressive behavior, charges for violent behavior, crime rate
Secondary outcome measures
Mental state, social functioning, treatment use and adherence, treatment costs, forensic risk, incidents of endangerment, violence, delinquency, forensic detention
German Clinical Trials Register
Degree of patients' perceived coercion; patients' empowerment, social role functioning and quality of life
Forensic risk profile, mental state, patients' and patient families' home conditions, activities of daily living, adherence, compliance
Trial registration Funding source
ID: DRKS00003738
Grant by the Ministry of Health, Emancipation, Care and Age of the State of North Rhine-Westphalia
Current Controlled Trials ISRCTN63162737
ZInEP is funded by a private donation
Ethical Commission of the German Psychological Society
ID: AM 12_2012 rev.
Grant by the Bavarian State Ministry of Employment and Social Order, the Family and Women
Forensic risk profiling, testing of neuropsychological performance and personality, standardized ratings of psychopathology and forensic risk; assessments of adherence, activities of daily living, home situation, rates of criminal offenses
2.2. Preventive Forensic Assertive Community Care of the District Hospital of Ansbach (PFACTA), State of Bavaria, Germany
2.2.1. Background
The project is set in the catchment area of the District Hospital of Ansbach (approx. 200,000 inhabitants aged over 18 years). It addresses all persons with a high risk of violence and a primary psychiatric diagno- sis of incipient or fully developed schizophrenia, personality disorder, or paraphilia. According to the literature, prevalence rates of schizophrenia, personality disorders, and paraphilias amount to about 1% each. In schizophrenic patients, it is estimated that approximately 3–5% have an illness-related increased risk profile to commit a crime of violence (Nitschke, Osterheider, & Mokros, 2011; Swanson, Holzer, Ganju, & Jono, 1990). Consequently, for the District of Ansbach, a one-year preva- lence of approximately 60–100 persons who are suffering from psychotic illness and in need of preventive treatment can be estimated. Regarding personality disordered and paraphilic patients, there is a paucity of scien- tific knowledge as to their proportion among an illness-related high-risk group for criminal violence. It is assumed that, compared to schizophre- nia, their proportion is much lower, amounting to a one-year prevalence of about 20 persons in the catchment area. Hence, there is a need for 80– 120 persons to be treated in the Preventive Forensic Preventive Outpa- tient Clinic of the District Hospital of Ansbach (PFACTA).
2.2.2. Aims
By offering a low threshold for forensic risk profiling and, if needed, a multi-disciplinary outreaching support, treatment and monitoring pro- gram, it is sought to reach patients' acceptance, motivation and insight into a treatment need by the PFACTA. By pre–post intervention compar- isons the effectiveness of this specialized support initiative is to be judged in relation to the development of the forensic risk profile, overt incidents of delinquency, patients' psychopathological and functional states and family conditions.
2.2.3. Type of study
The prospective intervention trial is designed to consecutively in- clude 80–120 high-risk-of-violence psychiatric patients from a natural- istic community setting. This is realized by a widespread mode of entry into the screening process of the study, allowing for self-referrals as well as referrals by general practitioners or clinicians. A matched control sample is recruited in a regular general-psychiatric outpatient setting of a different catchment area (Erlangen District Hospital).
2.2.4. Type of intervention
The intervention is delivered both by home visits and outpatient ap- pointments at the Ansbach District Hospital. Besides the communica- tion of the assessed forensic risk profile to the patient, treatment options include psychotherapy, pharmacotherapy, and manualized group therapies (e.g., Reasoning and Rehabilitation (R&R), Treatment Program for Sexual Offenders R + R, Sex Offender Treatment Program (SOTP)) by a multi-professional team. A no-drop-out policy is imple- mented, and mobile telecommunications (calls, text messages) are used to increase adherence and compliance.
2.2.5. Study subjects
Community dwelling subjects aged 18 years or older are legitimate for study inclusion, if forensic risk profiling constitutes an increased risk of violence related to psychiatric illness, and if they are either judged pre-psychotic or diagnosed with schizophrenia, severe personal- ity disorder or paraphilia. Risk profiling is done by structural clinical judgment mainly aided by the use of HCR-20. Patients who are judged as of medium or high risk for future violent behavior are included. Pri- mary diagnoses of substance dependence or intellectual disability are among the exclusion criteria. The recruitment of patients is done in close collaboration with the Department of General Psychiatry, District Hospital of Ansbach, psychiatrists in private practice, and general
practitioners in the catchment area of the District Hospital in Ansbach. Furthermore the patient himself and/or his family have also the oppor- tunity to contact the PFACTA directly. The public, clinicians, and the tar- get group are informed about the intervention program by presenting events, brochures, a website, and the media. The information empha- sizes that the program is not compulsory, but an extended offer of support.
2.2.6. Assessments
Assessments are taken at the time point of screening/study inclusion during and at the end of intervention and comprise forensic risk profil- ing, testing of neuropsychological performance and personality, stan- dardized ratings of psychopathology (e.g., PANSS (Kay, Fiszbein, & Opler, 1987), Symptom Checklist-90, SCL-90-R (Franke, 2002) and fo- rensic risk (e.g., PCL-R (Hare, 1991), HCR-20 (Webster et al., 1997)), level of aggression, assessments of adherence, activities of daily living, home situation, rates of criminal charges, and offenses.
2.2.7. Data analysis
To evaluate the effect of the intervention program, a pre–post-treat- ment comparison will be made regarding all major endpoints of the study. The primary outcome measure is the comparison of the level of aggression, the risk profile, and future charges for violent behavior be- tween the treatment and control groups. Moreover, the rates of adher- ence, readmissions, and the patients' activities of daily living will be compared.
2.3. Complex-therapeutic outpatient intervention for preventing endangering behavior in psychotic patients in the city of Düsseldorf, State of North-Rhine- Westphalia, Germany
2.3.1. Background
The PsychPrev study is conducted in the Section of General Psychi- atry at the University Hospital of Düsseldorf. Its setting is community- based, as the hospital subserves a large urban catchment area, and all consecutive cases of civil commitments in General Psychiatry are screened for study eligibility. These amount to about 200 confirmed or- ders per year, of which 30% are imposed because of endangerment of others. In 70% of these cases, psychotic disorders of the schizophrenia spectrum or manic psychoses are diagnosed as the underlying psychi- atric condition. The study hypothesis is that these patients are a sub- group at high risk for violence, which is insufficiently reached by standard psychiatric outpatient care and, therefore, in need of a more outreaching, complex-therapeutic approach tailored to specific sub- group problems.
2.3.2. Aims
The objective of the study is to evaluate whether a specified complex-therapeutic outpatient intervention, which is started after a public order placement following an act of endangerment or violence, is feasible and effective with regard to avoiding further involuntary hos- pitalizations (primary outcome), violence, and delinquency.
2.3.3. Type of study
The study is designed as a prospective non-randomized intervention trial. Comparison groups are a matched patient cohort receiving treat- ment as usual at the partner clinic in Cologne and the group of study de- cliners in Düsseldorf. The study is naturalistic, because all consecutive public order cases of the catchment area in Düsseldorf are screened for study participation.
2.3.4. Type of intervention
The study intervention is provided for 6 months. It consists of psychi- atric, psychotherapeutic, and social-therapeutic modules adapted to meet specific needs of the patient subgroup. For example, psycho- educational group therapy is adapted to target the topics of comorbid
C. Luckhaus et al. / Aggression and Violent Behavior 22 (2015) 1–8 5
6 C. Luckhaus et al. / Aggression and Violent Behavior 22 (2015) 1–8
addiction and violence in psychosis. Individualization of treatment is re- alized by treatment modules, such as individualized contingency plans and home visits. Further intervention principles are interlinking case management, patient tracking, a high degree of participative decision making and a no drop-out policy with the exception of patients' explicit withdrawal from the study. Following the intervention phase patients enter treatment as usual and are followed-up for 6 months.
2.3.5. Study subjects
Patients are screened for study participation if they are involuntarily hospitalized by public order because of endangerment or a violent act. They are eligible for study inclusion if they have a psychotic disorder as the leading diagnosis. Recruitment block stratifications are done to ensure a large proportion of schizophrenia spectrum disorders and a preponderance of males for comparability with forensic populations. Despite addressing involuntarily hospitalized patients, study participa- tion is fully voluntary, because patients are not asked to decide on par- ticipating until their placement ends. They are then free to choose no treatment, regular outpatient treatment or to be included in the outpa- tient intervention of the study.
2.3.6. Assessments
Assessments are made before the intervention phase (t0), immedi- ately after (t1), and 6 months after the intervention (t2). Psychiatric di- agnoses are made according to ICD-10. Psychiatric histories are taken by semi-structured interviews. Aggressive behavior is assessed by taking the forensic history and the Staff-Observation-Aggression-Scale-Revised (SOAS-R, Nijmann et al., 1999). The risk of future violence is rated using the HCR-20, PCL-SV and the Bremen-Risk-Assessment-Scale-for-Gener- al-Psychiatry (BRAS-GP, Von Berg, Haselbeck, Handschuh, & Timm, 2011). Psychopathology is rated by the PANSS (Kay et al., 1987). Social functioning is rated by GAF and CGI (Guy, 1976). Furthermore, a neuro- psychological test-battery inclusive of an IQ-rating is conducted.
2.3.7. Data analysis
Research data are collected before and after the intervention phase as well as at the end of follow-up. The primary outcome is the rate of re- hospitalization in general psychiatry of the intervention group vs. the comparison groups. This information can be reliably derived from rou- tine administrative data. Secondary outcome criteria relate to the clini- cal state and social functioning, treatment utilization and costs as well as to forensically relevant endpoints, such as endangering behavior, acts of violence, delinquency, and forensic detention. In a post-hoc analysis predictors of untoward and forensic courses will be sought.
3. Discussion
Persons with severe mental illness are often difficult to reach by out- patient services. Because of their complex mental health and social problems they are at a particularly high risk of unfavorable courses of ill- ness, concomitant involuntary hospital placements and forensic sequel- ae. The time after hospital discharge can be regarded a pivotal period of transition for these patients and often poses a lacuna in service provi- sion because of a lack in aftercare specified to their particular needs and acceptance. Consequently, it has been recommended to develop and test interventions specifically targeting needs for care in this patient group (Puschner et al., 2011). Measures targeting the prevention of in- voluntary hospital placements and forensic sequelae have only rarely been investigated in controlled trials based on larger samples, so far. All three ongoing trials presented here address this issue with a partic- ular focus on subgroups of patients, who have been involuntarily hospi- talized and/or carry a high risk of violence.
The psychoeducational intervention program currently conducted in the Canton of Zurich addresses patients with serious mental disorders who have previously experienced compulsory psychiatric hospitaliza- tion. It is supposed that this patient group may have a strong interest
to participate in such a program in order to avoid further compulsory measures, and this is expected to increase the motivation to participate in the study. The intervention program includes individualized psycho- education and a preventive monitoring after discharge from psychiatric hospital placement. In schizophrenia patients, psychoeducation has been reported to reduce the rate of rehospitalization in the long-term course (Bäuml et al., 2007). Psychoeducation focused on individual risk factors for crises/relapse accompanied by close monitoring by a per- sonal mental health care worker has also been suggested as a promising approach to prevent involuntary placement (Krischke, 2006). Rather than being confined to schizophrenia patients, the current study in- cludes patients with a wide range of psychiatric disorders. It is hypoth- esized that patients with all kinds of serious mental health problems who have been committed might benefit from such a program. Beyond that, it is hoped to better understand for which patient groups such a program can be used most effectively. An essential element of this pro- gram is the 24-month monitoring by a personal mental health care worker. Long-term commitment is supposed to have beneficial effects, bringing to mind the patient's individual action plan early in case of a crisis and offering the opportunity to motivate him/her to seek or con- tinue treatment. This seems to be crucial, because short-term or singular interventions cannot necessarily ensure that acquired knowledge is ap- plied or reasonable agreements are followed readily in the long term in case of a crisis. The largely negative outcome of the implementation of a joint crisis plan without a further treatment element to ensure continu- ous clinical monitoring (Thornicroft et al., 2013) seems to support this notion. The main aim of the intervention of the Zurich trial is the pre- vention of compulsory re-admission and the reduction of the patients' perceived coercion. The emphasis of the psychoeducational instruction and monitoring is on factors that are subject to the patient's self- management. Direct involvement in the regular therapies or involve- ment of family members are not intended in this program. Compared to other case management programs (e.g., ICM; Dieterich et al., 2011), the monitoring is carried out exclusively by phone in this trial. Albeit a less ‘narrow’ form of contact, this might accommodate those patients who hold reservations towards home visits by an outpatient mental health professional. The trial at Zurich will allow for a prospective anal- ysis of the effectiveness of this long-term intervention program. For the intervention group, the expected benefit is the prevention of compulso- ry re-admission and an increase in self-management skills. For the health care system, this would imply a reduction of involuntary inpatient episodes and savings of health care costs. Moreover this study will provide insight into processes and factors that contribute to involuntary placement or modify primary and secondary outcomes (e.g., outpatient service use, social network, psychopathology, patient history). After all, it will broaden our understanding of the special needs of difficult-to-reach severely mentally ill patients.
The PsychPrev study at Düsseldorf was conceptualized in view of the critical interface of general and forensic psychiatry regarding preventive management of schizophrenia patients with an increased risk for vio- lence. It is based on the hypothesis that the criterion – public order placement in general psychiatry for endangering behavior – denotes a subgroup of schizophrenia patients, that is prone to violent behavior and difficult to reach by standard psychiatric services. At the same time, by means of their public order placement, these patients are in contact with psychiatric services, and there may be a window for a targeted outpatient intervention following the placement. As has been pointed out by Kutscher et al. (2009), it is likely that this subgroup of schizophrenia and psychotic patients is otherwise prone to unfavorable courses of illness, precarity, delinquency and forensic sequelae. It is fur- ther supposed that an outpatient intervention specified for the particu- lar needs of this clientele may reach a higher degree of acceptance and compliance, which may help to overcome a deleterious circle of treat- ment discontinuation and involuntary readmissions (Jaeger et al., 2013). Besides treatment specifications for subgroup needs, acceptable modes of treatment delivery seem to be crucial in these patients with
an increased sensitivity to the impression of being coerced to treatment (Jaeger et al., 2013). This latter limitation may have a role in the report- ed ineffectiveness of compulsory outpatient treatment approaches (Brugha et al., 2012; Burns et al., 2013). The PsychPrev intervention tries to avoid this limitation by several strategies relating to voluntari- ness, such as participative decisions and treatment individualization. The primary outcome measure – involuntary rehospitalization in Gen- eral Psychiatry during and up to six months after the intervention – is a reliably registered routine administrative data and thus robustly ac- cessible in every screened patient. It is also frequent enough to allow for feasible statistical powering. With some limitations, involuntary re- hospitalization in General Psychiatry can be regarded as a more fre- quent surrogate endpoint of rarer forensic outcomes. In the case of significant global treatment effects on the primary and/or secondary outcome measures, regression analyses can be used to estimate the weights of singular treatment models. On an explorative level, less fre- quent outcome variables, such as a forensic course, can be related to possible predictors that were assessed at baseline.
The Ansbach study is designed to offer a particularly low threshold, multi-inclusive program for treatment and assistance to psychiatric patients at risk of future violence. Therefore, the study does not only focus on patients who have been under a treatment order, but further- more, on patients who are treated in private practice or who are not receiving any treatment at all. Self-referrals or consultations by relatives are also included. Besides psychiatric and social-worker outreach treat- ment, the core intervention of this study is a formal forensic risk moni- toring and its communication to the patient. The preventive effect of risk assessment as mediated by a better or more suitable treatment for clients is still at question. In a recent multicenter intervention trial in forensic-psychiatric outpatients, risk assessment combined with shared decision-making in subsequent care planning did not result in a preven- tive effect on violent behavior (Troquete et al., 2013). However, as a methodological drawback of the study it was noted that the experimen- tal intervention was introduced in already pre-existing treatment courses, which had lasted 26 months on average. Therefore, the study in- tervention may not have changed preformed ways of interacting and care planning between study managers and clients. Also, major treat- ment effects may already have occurred prior to the study intervention period, thus ameliorating its possible effect size. The Ansbach study will circumvent these methodological difficulties and also enroll a differ- ent clientele (i.e., subjects that are at risk but have not become forensic, and may thus be more amenable to treatment). In these subjects, an in- tervention balanced between the risk–need–responsibility model and the good-lives model (Andrews, Bonta, & Wormith, 2011) may possibly be more effective.
All three ongoing studies are population-based, as their screening and recruitment approaches cover natural catchment areas. While the PsychPrev study at Düsseldorf limits study inclusion to psychotic pa- tients, the trials conducted in Zurich and Ansbach enroll a broader spec- trum of the severely mentally ill inclusive of affective and personality disorders. Depending on the differing in- and exclusion criteria, consent procedures, and demands for study participation, some degrees of se- lection bias can be expected, but potential skewing will be different be- tween studies. By comparing outcomes between studies, questions related to which diagnoses to treat best will be addressable. The three studies also differ regarding their type of intervention. The Zurich study uses psycho-education, an individual crisis card, and long-term monitoring by telephone as a set combination in each patient. The Ansbach study uses an enriched outpatient and outreach treatment program with a particular emphasis on forensic risk profiling, which will make the inclusion of this particular measure appraisable in treating high-risk-of-violence psychiatric patients. The Düsseldorf study implements a complex-therapeutic approach, which consists of specified treatment modules. This will allow for judging the effect of the complex intervention and, by sub-analyses, of individual treatment modules.
4. Conclusion
Three ongoing prospective trials in Germany and Switzerland, which were conceptualized independently, address the issue of optimizing outpatient care for the subgroup of the severely mentally ill with an in- creased risk for violence/delinquency. The studies differ in their designs and methods with regard to included diagnoses, assessment methods, foci of interventions, modes of delivering care, degrees of assertiveness, and times of follow-up. The Düsseldorf and the Zurich study both assess compulsory readmissions to General Psychiatry as the primary out- come, while the Ansbach study primarily analyzes the future level of ag- gression and violent behavior. It can be expected that the joined information generated by all three studies will help to answer open questions on how to treat which subgroup of the severely mentally ill best with the goal of preventing compulsory measures and forensically relevant courses. Additionally, issues of allocation of treatment re- sources and cost-effectiveness will be addressable.
References
Andrews, D. A., Bonta, J., & Wormith, J. S. (2011). The risk–need–responsibility model: Does adding the good lives model contribute to effective crime prevention? Criminal Justice and Behavior, 38, 735–755.
Angermeyer, M. C., Kilian, R., & Matschinger, H. (2000). WHOQOL – 100 und WHOQOL – BREF: Handbuch für die deutschsprachige Version der WHO-Instrumente zur Erfassung von Lebensqualität. Göttingen: Hogrefe.
Attkisson, C. C., & Zwick, R. (1982). The Client Satisfaction Questionnaire: Psychometric properties and correlations with service utilization and psychotherapy outcome. Evaluation and Program Planning, 5, 233–237.
Bäuml, J., Pitschel-Walz, G., Volz, A., Engel, R. R., & Kissling, W. (2007). Psychoeducation in schizophrenia: 7-Year follow-up concerning rehospitalization and days in hospital in the Munich Psychosis Information Project Study. The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 68, 854–861.
Brugha, T. S., Taub, N., Smith, J., Morgan, Z., Hill, T., Meltzer, H., et al. (2012). Predicting outcome of assertive outreach across England. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 47, 313–322.
Burns, T., Rugkasa, J., Molodynski, A., Dawson, J., Yeeles, K., Vazquez-Montes, M., et al. (2013). Community treatment orders for patients with psychosis (OCTET): A ran- domized controlled trial. Lancet, 381, 1627–1633.
Chisolm, D., Knapp, M. R. J., Knudsen, H. C., Amaddeo, F., Gaite, L., & Van Wijngaarden, B. (2000). Client Socio-Demographic and Service Receipt Inventory — European Version: Development of an instrument for international research: EPSILON Study 5. British Journal of Psychiatry, 177, s28–s33.
Dieterich, M., Irving, C. B., Park, B., & Marshall, M. (2011). Intensive case management for severe mental illness (Review). The Cochrane Collaboration. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Doenisch-Seidel, U., van Treek, B., Geelen, A., Siebert, M., Rahn, E., Scherbaum, N., et al. (2007). Networking between forensic psychiatry and general psychiatry. Recht und Psychiatrie, 25, 183–187.
Franke, G. H. (2002). SCL-90-R Die Symptom-Checkliste von Derogatis — Deutsche Version Manual (2nd Ed.). Göttingen: Beltz.
Guy, W. (1976). ECDEU assessment manual for psychopharmacology — Revised. U.S. De- partment of Health, Education, and Welfare, Public Health Service, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration, ECDEU Assessment Manual (pp. 218–222).
Habermeyer, E., Wolff, R., Gillner, M., Strohm, R., & Kutscher, S. (2010). Patients with psy- chotic disorders in forensic psychiatric hospitals. Are there consequences for general psychiatry? Nervenarzt, 81, 1117–1124.
Hare, R. D. (1991). Manual of the Hare Psychopathy Checklist — Revised. Toronto, Canada: Multi-Health Systems.
Hart, S. D., Cox, D. N., & Hare, R. D. (1995). Manual for the Hare Psychopathy Checklist. Screening Version (PCL:SV). Toronto: Multi-Health Systems, Inc.
Henderson, C., Flood, C., Leese, M., Thornicroft, G., Sutherby, K., & Szmukler, G. (2004). Ef- fect of joint crisis plans on use of compulsory treatment in psychiatry: Single blind randomised controlled trial. British Medical Journal, 329, 122–123.
Henderson, C., Flood, C., Leese, M., Thornicroft, G., Sutherby, K., & Szmukler, G. (2009).
Views of service users and providers on joint crisis plans: Single blind randomized
controlled trial. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 44, 369–376.
Hodgins, S., Mueller-Isberner, R., & Allaire, J. F. (2006). Attempting to understand the in- crease in the numbers of forensic beds in Europe: A multi-site study of patients in fo- rensic and general psychiatric services. International Journal of Forensic Mental Health,
5, 173–184.
Jaeger, S., Pfiffner, C., Weiser, P., Laengle, G., Croissant, D., Schepp, W., et al. (2013). Long-
term effects of involuntary hospitalization on medication adherence, treatment en- gagement and perception of coercion. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 48, 1787–1796.
Kay, S. R., Fiszbein, A., & Opler, L. A. (1987). The positive and negative syndrome scale (PANSS) for schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 13, 261–276.
Kim, M. M., Van Dorn, R. A., Scheyett, A. M., Elbogen, E. E., Swanson, J. W., Schwartz, M. S., et al. (2007). Understanding the personal and clinical utility of psychiatric advance directives: A qualitative perspective. Psychiatry, 70, 19–29.
C. Luckhaus et al. / Aggression and Violent Behavior 22 (2015) 1–8 7
8 C. Luckhaus et al. / Aggression and Violent Behavior 22 (2015) 1–8
Kramp, P., & Gabrielsen, G. (2009). The organisation of the psychiatric service and crimi- nality committed by the mentally ill. European Psychiatry, 24, 401–411.
Krischke, N. (2006). Sozialpsychiatrische Gesundheitspsychologie. Qualitätssicherung in der Zwangseinweisungspraxis. Bonn: Psychiatrie Verlag.
Kutscher, S., Schiffer, B., & Seifert, D. (2009). Patients with schizophrenia in forensic- psychiatric hospitals (section 63 German penal code) in North Rhine-Westphalia. Fortschritte Neurologie Psychiatrie, 77, 91–96.
Lambert, M., Bock, T., Schöttle, D., Golks, D., Meister, K., Rietschel, L., et al. (2010). Asser- tive community treatment as part of integrated care versus standard care: A 12- month trial in patients with first- and multiple-episode schizophrenia spectrum dis- orders treated with quetiapine immediate release (ACCESS trial). Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 71, 1313–1323.
Lay, B., Nordt, C., & Rössler, W. (2011). Variation in use of coercive measures in psychiatric hospitals. European Psychiatry, 26, 244–251.
Lay, B., Salize, H., Dressing, H., Rüsch, N., Schönenberger, T., Bühlmann, M., et al. (2012).
Preventing compulsory admission to psychiatric inpatient care through psycho-
education and crisis focused monitoring. BMC Psychiatry, 12, 136.
Lidz, C. W., Hoge, S. K., Gardner, W., Bennett, N. S., Monahan, J., Mulvey, E. P., et al. (1995). Perceived coercion in mental hospital admission: Pressures and process. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 52, 1034–1039.
Lukoff, D., Nuechterlein, K. H., & Ventura, J. (1986). Manual for the Expanded Brief Psychi-
atric Rating Scale. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 12, 594–602.
Nijmann, H. L. I., Muris, P., Merckelbach, H. L. G. J., Palmstierna, T., Wistedt, B., Vos, A. M.,
et al. (1999). The staff observation aggression scale — Revised (SOAS-R). Aggressive
Behavior, 25, 197–209.
Nitschke, J., Osterheider, M., & Mokros, M. (2011). Schizophreniforme Erkrankungen, Psy-
chose und Tötungsdelikte: Die Bedeutung sozialpsychiatrischer Maßnahmen zu
Prävention von Delikten. Psychiatrische Praxis, 38, 82–86.
Papageorgiou, A., King, M., Janmohamed, A., Davidson, O., & Dawson, J. (2002). Advance
directives for patients compulsorily admitted to hospital with serious mental illness:
Randomised controlled trial. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 181, 513–519.
Phelan, J. C., Sinkewicz, M., Castille, D. M., Huz, S., Muenzenmaier, K., & Link, B. G. (2010). Effectiveness and outcomes of assisted outpatient treatment in New York State.
Psychiatric Services, 61, 137–143.
Puschner, B., Steffen, S., Völker, K. A., Spitzer, C., Gaebel, W., Janssen, B., et al. (2011).
Needs-oriented discharge planning for high utilisers of psychiatric services: Multicentre randomized controlled trial. Epidemiology and Psychiatric Sciences, 20, 181–192.
Rogers, E. S., Chamberlin, J., Ellison, M. L., & Crean, T. (1997). A consumer-constructed scale to measure empowerment among users of mental health services. Psychiatric Services, 48, 1042–1047.
Salize, H. J., & Dressing, H. (2004). Epidemiology of involuntary placement of mentally ill people across the European Union. British Journal of Psychiatry, 184, 163–168.
Schanda, H., Stompe, T., & Ortwein-Swoboda, G. (2010). Increasing criminality in patients with schizophrenia: Fiction, logical consequence or avoidable side effect of the men- tal health reforms? Neuropsychiatrie, 24, 170–181.
Schulz, U., & Schwarzer, R. (2003). Soziale Unterstützung bei der Krankheitsbewältigung. Die Berliner Social Support Skalen (BSSS) [Social support in coping with illness: The Berlin Social Support Scales (BSSS)]. Berlin Social Support Scale (BSSS). Diagnostica, 49. (pp. 73–82).
Steadman, H. J., Gounis, K., Dennis, D., Hopper, K., Roche, B., Swartz, M., et al. (2001).
Assessing the New York City involuntary outpatient commitment pilot program.
Psychiatric Services, 52, 330–336.
Swanson, J. W., Holzer, C. E., III, Ganju, V. K., & Jono, R. T. (1990). Violence and psychiatric
disorder in the community: Evidence from the Epidemiologic Catchment Area sur-
veys. Hospital & Community Psychiatry, 41, 761–770.
Swartz, M. S., Swanson, J. W., Hiday, V. A., Wagner, H. R., Burns, B. J., & Borum, R. (2001). A
randomized controlled trial of outpatient commitment in North Carolina. Psychiatric
Services, 52, 325–329.
Swartz, M. S., Swanson, J. W., Wagner, H. R., Burns, B. J., Hiday, V. A., & Borum, R. (1999).
Can involuntary outpatient commitment reduce hospital recidivism?: Findings from a randomized trial with severely mentally ill individuals. American Journal of Psychia- try, 156, 1968–1975.
Thornicroft, G., Farrelly, S., Szmukler, G., Birchwood, M., Waheed, W., Flach, C., et al. (2013). Clinical outcomes of Joint Crisis Plans to reduce compulsory treatment for people with psychosis: A randomised controlled trial. Lancet, 381, 1634–1641.
Troquete, N. A. C., van den Brink, R. H. S., Beintema, H., Mulder, T., van Os, T. W. D. P., Schoevers, R. A., et al. (2013). Risk assessment and shared care planning in out- patient forensic psychiatry: Cluster randomized controlled trial. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 202, 365–371.
Von Berg, S., Haselbeck, H., Handschuh, D., & Timm, J. (2011). Bremen Risk Assessment Scale for General Psychiatry. Nervenarzt, 82, 886–894.
Webster, C. D., Douglas, K. S., Eaves, D., & Hart, S. D. (1997). HCR-20: Assessing risk for violence. Vancouver: Simon Fraser University.
Xia, J., Merinder, L. B., & Begamwar, M. R. (2013). Psychoeducation for schizophrenia (Review). The Cochrane Collaboration. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
ZInEP (a). http://www.zinep.ch/pvz
