COQUITLAM - The school district has experienced a spike in school vandalism;




Abstract: RICHMOND - A young man charged in connection with a vicious Halloween-night swarming attack and now also facing separate robbery charges will be back in Richmond provincial court on Tuesday for a bail hearing on his latest charges. Last fall, the Integrated Homicide Investigative Team and members of the Richmond RCMP arrested the men, but investigators are still not saying whether Chan's death is connected with the December 1998 murder of notorious drug dealer Bindy Johal. RICHMOND - A Chinese national apprehended for allegedly trying to bring child pornography through Vancouver International Airport will be arraigned Oct. 21 in Richmond provincial court.


Full text: with 26 windows broken at Moody Middle School, 19 at Hillcrest Middle and 13 at Maple Creek Middle in the week of Aug. 19 to 25.
Maple Creek and Hillcrest are located in Coquitlam, while Moody Middle is in Port Moody.
Cheryl Quinton, communications manager for School District 43, said she's not exactly sure why it happened, but the time of year, coupled with the nice weather that week, may have something to do with it.
"It's typical that vandalism rates do spike in hot weather and closer to the start of the school year," Quinton said. "Other than that, I'm not really sure. It just happens in pockets and spurts." The last big jump in vandalism to school district buildings happened in March when there were 23 incidents of new graffiti in one week.
There had been only eight incidents of new graffiti in the previous week.
Vandalism cost the school district $220,000 in the 2002-2003 school year.
DELTA - Two women and a man were arrested Friday after police busted an alleged marijuana grow operation at a home in the 4600 block of 45 Avenue in Ladner.
Officers seized 365 plants, with an estimated value of $135,000, and also $8,000 worth of equipment.
They also seized a .22-calibre rifle and five pounds of pre-packaged marijuana.
MAPLE RIDGE - Police are looking for a 25-year-old man, described as a person of interest, in connection with a fight between a man and a woman that preceded a high-speed chase on Thursday night.
Joseph Terrance Tremblay, of Maple Ridge, is the registered owner of the newer-model Ford F150 pick-up seen speeding away from the scene of the altercation, with the woman inside the vehicle.
The pursuit followed a report to police about a dispute on the street between a man and woman in the 22500-block of Royal Crescent around 11 p.m., said Corporal Rhonda Stoner of the Ridge Meadows RCMP.
As police arrived, the suspect allegedly forced the woman into the truck and drove away eastbound on the Lougheed Highway, Stoner said.
The truck was being driven erratically as the pursuit continued north on Kanaka Way at speeds exceeding 140 km/h.
Eventually, the truck driver eluded the police, Stoner said.
Police are now searching for Tremblay and are concerned about the well-being of the woman in the truck.
Tremblay is Caucasian, six-foot-three with short brown hair and hazel eyes.
Police say there's an outstanding warrant for his arrest for uttering threats.
The woman is in her early 20's, Caucasian with blonde hair and dark clothing.
The 2004 Ford F150 pick-up truck is silver with the B.C. license plate 043 7HJ.
Anyone with information on Tremblay's whereabouts is asked to call Ridge Meadows RCMP at 604-463-6251.
NORTH VANCOUVER District residents are being invited to help save their local shores on Sept. 11.
The Save our Shores Group is asking people to meet up at the group s tent, near the Cates Park concession building, at 10 a.m. for the annual Save our Shores Beach Clean Up.
Wear old clothes, sturdy footwear and gloves and bring a snack and drinking water. The clean-up will continue until 1 p.m.
NORTH VANCOUVER A former bookkeeper, who is serving a conditional sentence for taking almost $250,000 of taxpayer money from the coffers of the municipal golf course where she worked, was back in court Wednesday.
In June, Christie Hammond was sentenced to two years minus a day for the fraud, to be served in the community.
Hammond was back in court Aug. 25 because of a number of complaints regarding the four hours she is allowed for personal time in the community as part of her house arrest.
Crown prosecutor Teresa Mitchell-Banks argued that the personal time should be fixed to a certain day and time period, so people in the community will know if she is violating the terms of her sentence.
Defence lawyer Tim Ellan argued that if people feel that Hammond is violating her sentence, they can complain and if she is in contravention, it will be dealt with.
Judge Judith Gedye did not fix Hammond s personal time, but said Hammond must serve her 100 hours of community service in the final two-thirds of her sentence, instead of the first third, and the personal time is on top of time she can take for things such as counselling or medical and dental appointments.
NORTH VANCOUVER The PNE isn t the only gig in town this Sunday.
Deep Cove is celebrating its Deep Cove Daze on Aug. 29 at Panorama Park with music, magic, food, dog shows, tea, a dunk tank, midway rides and games.
Presented by Musart, the day starts at 10:30 a.m. with a pancake breakfast put on by the Seymour Lions and continues with bands on the main stage from 1 p.m. until 7:30 p.m., presentations and plays on the side stage until 5 p.m.
and entertainment throughout the day until 9:30 p.m.
Local merchants and artisans will sell their wares and a food court and midway snacks will keep bellies full.
A shuttle bus will be available from Dollarton Centre and Parkgate Centre.
Admission is free, but donations will be gratefully accepted.
PORT MOODY - A pie-eating contest, a weird-vegetable contest and an old fashioned bottle toss will be some of the new activities at this weekend's eighth-annual Blackberry Tea and Heritage Garden Party.
The Port Moody Arts Centre, at 2425 St. Johns Street, is hosting the event on Sun., Aug. 29, from noon to 4 p.m.
Polygon Homes is sponsoring the event, which also features afternoon tea in the galleries as well as the outdoor licensed tea tent for only $5.
Antique cars will be on display and visotors can have readings of tea leaves and sample fruit wine from the Langley Wine Company.
The museum will conduct heritage tours of the old town center, and the Canadiana Costume Society will have a display of vintage costumes.
You can also win prizes for dressing up in early 1900's attire.
For more information, call 604-931-2008.
RICHMOND - A 20-year-old local man who allegedly posted personal information about police officers on the internet will go to trial June 1, 2005.
Michael Christopher Dejong appeared in Richmond provincial court to have a trial date set on charges, including criminal harassment and uttering threats, in connection with a website that reportedly had pictures of unmarked police cars and the addresses of officers' homes.
According to police, the website included the name of Richmond RCMP Superintendent Ward Clapham s wife, their phone number and a map of their residential area.
The website allegedly also contained threats of harm.
The RCMP said it has dealt with the man before, but won't reveal what had been going on in the past.
Dejong was also recently charged with separate counterfeit money and drug offences.
He's free on bail.
RICHMOND - A young man charged in connection with a vicious Halloween-night swarming attack and now also facing separate robbery charges will be back in Richmond provincial court on Tuesday for a bail hearing on his latest charges.
Christopher Marshall was arrested last month for several of robberies involving food delivery people.
He is also one of the four men charged for an Oct. 31, 2003, attack on Kostyantin Rogozin, 45, and his wife Valentina.
The Rogozins were driving in the 8600 block of Bennett Road when a large group of people allegedly surrounded their car and beat up the husband.
Richmond RCMP later said it was a case of mistaken identity, and the couple were in the wrong place at the wrong time.
Also charged in that case is Marshall's brother, Brett Marshall, and Matthew Dale Kitts.
The three won't be going to trial until next April.
A fourth person charged, Eduardo Ernesto Medrano, 21, was handed a conditional discharge for mischief after pleading guilty.
RICHMOND - A preliminary hearing will begin Nov. 8 in Richmond provincial court for three of four men charged in connection with the May 2003 death of a member of the Lotus Gang.
Michael Andrew Mercredi and Justine Nethanial Po, both 28, and Aharon Lee Campbell, 22, are charged with the first-degree murder of Raymond Man Yuen Chan, 31.
Chan's beaten and bloodied body was discovered in an alley at 5740 Cedarbridge Way, behind the Richmond court building.
Also charged with first-degree in the case is Mark James Thrower, 35.
His preliminary hearing was held separately. He will stand trial in February.
Last fall, the Integrated Homicide Investigative Team and members of the Richmond RCMP arrested the men, but investigators are still not saying whether Chan's death is connected with the December 1998 murder of notorious drug dealer Bindy Johal.
Johal had been facing charges of extortion and unlawful confinement for the alleged kidnapping of Chan's younger brother, Randy, apparently after a drug deal went bad.
Also charged in Randy Chan's kidnapping was Johal associate Roman Mann, but before going to trial he was also murdered. Mann's body was dumped in a Richmond industrial park.
RICHMOND - A Chinese national apprehended for allegedly trying to bring child pornography through Vancouver International Airport will be arraigned Oct. 21 in Richmond provincial court.
Jing Chen Wang, 32, was arrested and charged July 24 with possession of child pornography.
The pornography was reportedly found on his personal computer after customs officials questioned him.
He was released on $10,000 cash bail.
RICHMOND - A 19-year-old Vancouver man charged with attempted murder in connection with a drive-by shooting outside a local McDonald's will be arraigned Tuesday in Richmond provincial court.
Avtar Singh Kaur is charged with an April 28 shooting outside the restaurant at Bridgeport Road and Sweden Way.
According to the RCMP, numerous shots were fired by at least one man at a group of young men standing outside.
Another 19-year-old man may have been the intended target, said police.
The man believed to be the intended target was reportedly involved in an altercation with a female in Vancouver a few hours earlier.
An off-duty officer inside McDonalds saw what happened and managed to keep the potential witnesses at the scene before they could leave.
A second young man was arrested in the case but charges against him were later stayed.
RICHMOND - An 18-year-old former Cambie Secondary School student will be sentenced Sept. 23 for a bullying incident at the school.
Wilson Wan Yiu Chan, 18, was charged, along with two young offenders, earlier this year with three counts of extortion and assault in connection with incidents involving six students from the school.
Chan later agreed to plead guilty to a reduced charge of threatening.
Chan and his co-accused allegedly forced the students to give them money, but several other students who witnessed what was happening notified school staff.
The RCMP was then called in to investigate and the victims agreed to cooperate.
Chan will be sentenced in Richmond provincial court.
SURREY - A trial will begin Jan. 26 for a 43-year-old man facing charges in connection with a crash that claimed the life of a motorcyclist.
Antonio Pacheco Daponte is charged with various counts, including impaired driving and dangerous driving causing death, following a May 18 incident on 232nd Street in Langley.
According to RCMP, a pick-up traveling west on 24th Avenue failed to stop at a stop sign at the intersection of 232nd Street and struck a motorcycle driven by David Ronald Coburn, 24, who was killed instantly.
Daponte is out on bail after positing a $50,000 surety in Surrey provincial court.
SURREY - A 40-year-old Vancouver man charged with three counts of sexual assault and one count of sexual interference against children will go to trial Feb. 21.
Gordon Alfred Pargelen was charged in connection with incidents that allegedly took place in an apartment complex in the 9800 block of 151 Street between September 2003 and May 2004.
According to Surrey RCMP, the victims were a 10-year-old girl and two boys, aged 12 and 16.
The incidents were not connected with any school or school activities, said police.
Pargelen is out on bail with conditions that include staying away from anyone under 14.
SURREY - A preliminary hearing will begin Nov. 15 in Surrey provincial court for a local youth pastor charged with sex offences against a teenage boy.
Cecil Rast, 43, is charged with sexual assault, sexual exploitation and sexual interference for alleged incidents committed between 1995 and 1999.
According to Surrey RCMP, the incidents happened while the pastor with the Youth for Christ Organization counselled the boy, and started when the complainant was 13 and finished when he was 17.
Rast, who has no criminal record, is out on bail on the condition he stay away from anyone under 18.
SURREY - One of three men arrested following an alleged shooting incident on July 27 will be back in Surrey provincial court on Wednesday for a bail hearing.
Christian Fulmer was charged with several offences, including aggravated assault and intent to wound using a firearm, after an incident involving two vehicles in the area of 84th Avenue and King George Highway.
According to police, an argument broke out between the drivers of two cars in the early morning hours and someone in one of the cars shot several times at the second vehicle.
One person in the second vehicle was hit and suffered non-life-threatening injuries.
The suspect vehicle then fled, but police located it in the Cloverdale area and stopped it after a chase into Langley.
A police dog was called in to track the alleged driver and Fulmer was subsequently arrested.
He was later treated for dog bites.
SURREY - A man arrested last month for numerous car thefts and high-speed incidents will be back in Surrey provincial court Aug. 31 trying to get bail.
Robert Osborne, 29, was apprehended after more than 15 Canada-wide arrest warrants were issued for him.
He was nabbed trying to make a run for it through a Surrey Superstore after ditching a stolen Ford F150 that smashed several fences.
Shortly before he was caught, the Surrey RCMP also sent out a warning that Osborne's paranoid behaviour and driving posed a serous risk to public safety.
Osborne told a judge at an earlier court proceeding that he felt compelled to run when the RCMP issued a release that he was one of its most wanted car thieves.
SURREY - A 24-year old man who pleaded guilty to stealing a vehicle didn't want to spend any more time in jail where things got a little rough for him.
Stuart Gregg was arrested June 16 after officers from the RCMP auto theft unit saw him driving a stolen 1994 Dodge Caravan.
Given a conditional sentence for other property offences earlier this year, he was carrying tools including a screwdriver used to steel the vehicle.
"It's becoming all too routine in Surrey," said Crown lawyer Jim Lees.
Gregg's lawyer said the man doesn't want to spend any more time in jail because he was beaten up while in bed at the pre-trial centre and he's now in segregation.
The lawyer also noted Gregg is dealing with a crystal meth addiction, but has a good attitude in wanting to kick the habit.
Citing his criminal record, the judge, handed him nine-month jail sentence minus time served for his latest crime.
SURREY - A local man charged with possession of child pornography will be back in Surrey provincial court Sept. 7 for a possible guilty plea and disposition.
John Ferguson was charged earlier this year after a computer repairman allegedly found images on Ferguson's personal computer.
The Crown noted that due to the circumstances of the case, the prosecution will likely only seek a peace bond for Ferguson which doesn't carry a criminal record but restricts his behaviour.
WEST VANCOUVER A New Westminster man could be charged with three counts of uttering counterfeit money after he allegedly used fake $10 bills while shopping at Caulfield Plaza on Aug. 26.
An employee of one of the stores that the 20-year-old bought items from became suspicious of some $10 bills the suspect used and called 911.
Police arrived and found the man in the plaza s liquor store and arrested him. When he was searched, police found eight counterfeit $10 bills and recovered three more from the businesses where the suspect had shopped.
The suspect was later released on a promise to appear. His first court appearance is scheduled for Oct. 27.
Lower Mainland News June 18, 2004 Sterling News Normal.dot Sterling News

People: Tremblay, Joseph Terrance Stoner, Rhonda Hammond, Christie Chan, Yuen Johal, Bindy

Title: COQUITLAM - The school district has experienced a spike in school vandalism

Publication title: CanWest News; Don Mills, Ont.

Pages: 1

Number of pages: 0

Publication year: 2004

Publication date: Sep 7, 2004

Publisher: Infomart, a division of Postmedia Network Inc.

Place of publication: Don Mills, Ont.

Publication subject: General Interest Periodicals--Canada

Source type: Wire Feeds

Language of publication: English

Document type: WIRE FEED

ProQuest document ID: 461358855

Document URL: https://search.proquest.com/docview/461358855?accountid=14784

Copyright: (Copyright )

Last updated: 2011-09-27

Database: Canadian Business & Current Affairs Database

____________________________________________________________

Contact us at: http://www.proquest.com/go/pqissupportcontact
Copyright © 2017 ProQuest LLC. All rights reserved.
Terms and Conditions: http://search.proquest.com/info/termsAndConditions