JOURNAL OF APPLIED BEHAVIOR ANALYSIS PREVENTING SCHOOL VANDALISM AND IMPROVING DISCIPLINE: A THREE-YEAR STUDY




Vandalism is a major problem facing educators and taxpayers alike. The present investigation
analyzed how vandalism costs and student disruption were related to the implementation
of a training and consultation package designed to increase the reinforcing ambience
of the school. A positive environment, it was posited, would displace previous events
that may have set the occasion for vandalism, with cues to promote productive school
performance. Eighteen elementary and junior high schools were involved over a 3-year
period. Using a delayed treatment control design, treatment was delivered following
either 4 or 13 months of baseline. During treatment, teams of school personnel attended
training workshops in behavioral strategies for reducing vandalism and disruption by
students in school. Each team also met regularly on its campus to plan and implement
programs on a schoolwide basis. To demonstrate that reinforcing procedures were
actually implemented and accompanied by change in student performance, these variables
were periodically probed throughout the study. Project staff also provided consultation.
Vandalism costs decreased significantly (p < .05) more in treatment than control schools,
with an average reduction of 78.5 % for all project schools. Rates of praise delivered by
project teachers and other randomly selected teachers in the school increased significantly
(p < .05), and rates of off-task behavior by students decreased significantly (p < .05)
following treatment. The staff development model used in this study appeared to be
both feasible and economical.
DESCRIPTORS: vandalism, setting events, school environment, classroom, staff
management
School vandalism, a complex problem area of
extreme social importance, is increasing in magnitude.
Nationwide, over 5,000 assaults on
This project was funded by an Elementary and Secondary
Education Act Title IV-C Grant and the
Office of the Los Angeles County Superintendent of
Schools. The authors thank Dorothy Burstein, Dave
Crocker, Randy Howell, Janelle Hussey, Ken Johnson,
Judy Jones, Paul Kaplan, Ted Komoto, Venetia
Louie, Pat Radi, Betsy Smith, Helen Susek, and Nancy
Van Derveer for their assistance in data collection or
consultation. Reprints of this manuscript may be obtained
from G. Roy Mayer, Department of Counselor
Education, California State University at Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, California 90032. Copies of documents
referred to in notes 5, 7, and 8 may be ordered
from Tom Butterworth, Office of the Los Angeles
County Superintendent of Schools, 9300 East Imperial
Highway, Downey, California 90242.
teachers are reported each month, and over $500
million is spent each year to repair damage done
by school-aged vandals (National Institute of
Education, 1978). It was reported in a recent Los
Angeles County School Attendance and Welfare
Bulletin (Note 1) that in school districts
throughout Los Angeles County the average
vandalism costs were in excess of $8.5 million
for the 1978-1979 school year, a 56% increase
over the 1977-1978 school year. Additional indirect
expenses are incurred by school districts
for insurance, security guards, and other presumed
deterrents to vandalism. These expenses
appear to exceed the cost of repairing the effects
of vandalism. The Los Angeles Unified School
District's Security Section, for example, had a
355
1983, 16, 355-369 NUMBER 4 (WINTER 1983)
G. ROY MAYER et al.
budget of about $10 million for personnel salaries
alone, an increase of nearly $4 million
since 1978.
Superficial logic would suggest that improved
methods of detection and punishment would
ameliorate vandalism. However, the introduction
of heavy security arrangements may well
aggravate the very problem that this kind of
deterrence is intended to eliminate, due to a
resultant increase in the aversive nature of the
environment (Greenberg, 1974). Other prescriptive
approaches have also been less than successful
(Gee, 1974, Ziesel, 1976). For example,
Project PRIDE (Note 2), which stressed a clean
campus and provided special plaques for individuals
or groups who engaged in "campus
pride" activities, appeared to produce only temporary
effects, perhaps because they did not
identify and treat factors that appear to foster
vandalism.
Methods to reduce vandalism are just beginning
to be experimentally investigated. For example,
Mayer and Butterworth (1979) pilottested
the first experimental intervention package
that was designed to treat setting factors
that appeared to foster vandalism within the
elementary school environment through consultation
and inservice activities. They demonstrated
a 57% average decrease in the cost of
repairing vandalized property for 10 experimental
schools, whereas the average costs for 9
control schools increased 320%. Further, students
attended more to class work, positive
teacher-student contacts improved or remained
significantly higher, and students' inappropriate
behavior decreased more in the experimental
than in the control schools.
Wahler and Fox (1981) have proposed "that
behavior analysts should increase the range of
environmental phenomena that they seek to
manipulate and relate to the changes in socially
important behaviors" (p. 328). They go on to
suggest that many behavior problems such as
stealing, fighting, truancy, and property destruction
may be approached through operating on
temporally remote stimuli, or setting events.
Several complex and temporally distant conditions
of the school environment have been posited
by Mayer and Butterworth (1979) to contribute
toward promoting vandalism. These
potential setting events include: (a) a mismatch
between student reading level and the difficulty
of assigned materials; (b) the prevalence of punishment
as a schoolwide and classroom management
procedures; and, (c) otherwise misusing
behavior management procedures.
When assigned reading materials do not
match the student's repertoire of skills, boredom
or frustration may result. Many students, particularly
those whose reading ability does not
permit them to complete their assignments successfully,
are more apt to experience defeat, reproach,
ridicule, and other probable aversive
consequences. This combination of extinction
and punishment may also serve to imbue scholastic
activities and materials with conditioned
aversive properties.
Findings from the experimental analysis of
behavior have taught us that extinction and punishment
tend to provoke aggression and destruction
in laboratory animals (Azrin, Hutchinson,
& Hake, 1963; Azrin & Holz, 1966; Azrin, Note
3). By analogy it is reasonable to hypothesize
that some proportion of the aggression and destruction
in the form of vandalism that takes
place in public schools is a reaction to those very
same factors. This seems probable in light of
findings that teacher disapproval generally occurs
at least three times more frequently than
teacher approval (Thomas, Presland, Grant, &
Glen, 1978). Further complicating the situation
is the fact that aggressive behavior is reinforced,
often inadvertently, by school authorities via
attention and by peers in the form of approval
and media attention, thereby increasing aggression
and promoting its generalization across settings
(Horton, 1970).
In accordance with Wahler and Fox's (1981)
proposal-"that behavior analysts should increase
the range of environmental phenomena
that they seek to manipulate and relate to the
changes in socially important behavior" (p. 328)
SCHOOL VANDALISM AND DISCIPLINE
-the present study, which spans a 3-year period,
attempted to manipulate the potential setting
events described above in an effort to reduce
the costs of vandalism. Presumably then, the aggressiveness
and destructiveness engendered by
extinction and punishment would be supplanted
by more pro-social reactions. It was this basic
assumption that this program of research was designed
to test.
Although the main thrust of this study was
to assess the influence of the training package
on rates of vandalism, it was important to demonstrate
that constructive change in the performance
of teachers and students was actually
implemented. Consequently, periodic probes of
praise by teachers and disruptive and on- and
off-task behavior by students were taken. Additionally,
to examine the practicality of intervening
with representatives of the instructional
staff rather than a more costly method of involving
everyone directly in training, the "spillover"
effect of the program to teachers who had
neither attended the workshops nor received
regularly scheduled direct consultation was also
assessed.
METHODS
Selection of Schools
Twenty schools, which had not participated
in the pilot study by Mayer and Butterworth
(1979), from 12 districts in Los Angeles County
were selected from a list of volunteers because
these schools maintained systems for gathering
data on vandalism costs, and their students' average
reading scores on the Comprehensive Test
of Basic Skills were below the 45th percentile
nationally. Ten of the schools were assigned
randomly to an experimental treatment condition,
Group I, and 10 to a delayed treatment
condition, Group II. One control school and one
experimental school withdrew due to disinterest
of the staff. Five elementary and four junior
high schools in each group completed the first
year of the project. Data were collected in an
identical fashion in all schools.
The control schools in Group II were provided
with the opportunity to receive services
from the project staff during the second and
third year. Seven of the nine participated during
the second year, and six during the third year.
The Group I schools were invited to continue
participation in the project for second and third
years, receiving essentially follow-up services.
Due to administrative and other staff changes,
only six of the nine Group I schools continued
during the second year, and five during the third
year, leaving three elementary and two junior
high schools in Group I, and three elementary
and three junior high schools in Group II by the
third year.
Selection of Teachers
Two teachers from grades 4 through 8 were
selected for extended participation in each of
the 18 schools. Each site principal was asked to
select two "model" teachers following the selection
criteria described by Mayer and Butterworth
(1979). These teachers were to have demonstrated
a willingness to try new ideas, had
gained the respect of their fellow staff members
(enhancing their effectiveness as models to other
teachers), and expressed a willingness to commit
the time to work with the principal and
psychologist in developing programs to reduce
vandalism and disruption.
Each principal also selected two other teachers
at random from the same grades to serve as
barometer teachers, the only criterion being a
willingness to allow observers into the classroom.
These teachers were included to measure
the "spillover" effect taking place within the
project school. To reduce the bias of this measure,
no deliberate attempt was made to consult
with them.
Selection of Students
Six students in each of the project barometer
classrooms were randomly selected from a preidentified
group of students who had scored
10% below their class average on the Reading
Comprehension and Vocabulary sections of the
357
G. ROY MAYER et al.
Comprehensive Test of Basic Skills and were at
least 10% above the classroom average in offtask
behavior (nonattending and disruptive behavior).
The off-task behavior was measured
during three classroom observations using the
Behavioral Assessment Instrument (Mayer &
Butterworth, 1979). These students were selected
on the assumption that they could most
benefit from the treatment program and were
observed at scheduled intervals.
Consultants
Six graduate students, working toward their
school counseling and school psychology credentials
at California State University, Los Angeles,
served as part-time consultants or data collectors
to the project schools during the first two
years of the study. Each graduate student had
formal university training in applied behavior
analysis using the texts written by Sulzer-Azaroff
and Mayer (1977) and Mayer and McGookin
(Note 4). Two consultants were assigned to each
treatment school. One was primarily responsible
for data collection and the other for consulting
with school staff. During the third year, the number
of graduate students was reduced to five.
Two of the five were responsible for consulting.
The other three were responsible for data collection
and did not consult with teachers.
Workshop Presenters
A project director (second author) and a chief
consultant (first author) presented the workshops.
The project director had a doctorate in
educational psychology, training and experience
in applied behavior analysis, and experience in
school psychology. The chief consultant was professor
of education and experienced in staff development
and in training school counselors and
school psychologists in behavior analysis.
Data Collection and Measures
Vandalism was the response of primary interest,
but because acts of vandalism occur surreptitiously,
they are essentially impossible to
observe and one must use indirect measures. In
this case it was decided that the products of vandalism
would be measured by means of the cost
required to repair the damage that had been
caused. The other measures were selected for a
different reason: to demonstrate that the intervention
did actually take place; that teachers did
indeed begin to implement the new skills they
were taught during training and consultation
sessions. Rates of praise by teachers and changes
in task performance by students were selected
because they were presumed to epitomize
changes within the school climate. Further, at
some time in the future it might be shown that
increases in rates of praise by teachers and increases
in on-task behavior by students reliably
contribute toward reductions in acts of vandalism
(or aggression or other antisocial acts).
Vandalism costs. Vandalism data were collected
in the same manner as in the Mayer and
Butterworth (1979) study. The costs of repairing
and replacing vandalized property were provided
for each academic month by the project
schools, and included the costs to replace or repair
broken glass, equipment theft, fire damage,
and property damage. The data sought and obtained
were the same as those reported to the
state. To compare expenses among schools, costs
were reported per 100 students.
Student and teacher behavior. The Behavioral
Assessment Instrument was used by the project
consultants to probe the six selected students'
off-task and attending behavior, and each teacher's
rate and kind of positive reinforcement
directed toward the students. The Behavioral
Assessment Instrument uses a time-sampling
procedure in which the first student is observed
for 10 sec and the student's behavior recorded
during the following 5 sec. This process is repeated
for all students being observed. During
the fourth and eighth 10-sec intervals, the
teacher's behavior is observed and the type of
reinforcement, if any, recorded-just as with the
students. This procedure is continued until 10
observations are collected for each student and
358
SCHOOL VANDALISM AND DISCIPLINE
20 observations for the teacher. These observations
are completed in 20 min. Three categories
of student behavior were recorded. Disruption
was defined as behaviors that disturb either the
teacher or students by drawing attention to the
student, such as talking without permission, hitting,
yelling, making noises by voice or with
objects, and out of seat behavior that causes
other students to look at the disruptor. Non
task was defined as behaviors that do not disturb
others but do not contribute to completion of
assignments-behaviors such as reading during
math, looking out the window, or head on desk.
Attending was defined as behaviors related to
assigned activities, such as eyes directed toward
teachers when they are talking, eyes directed
toward work, doing assignments, answering
questions, and getting supplies.
Praise included specific praise and general
praise. Specific praise was defined as the delivery
of praise paired with the rationale or
reason for its delivery, e.g., "Great, you were able
to remember that 9 times 4 is 36." General
praise (a generic term used for purposes of simplicity)
consisted of positive evaluative statements,
rephrasing what a student said, approving
gestures, positive physical contact, and recognition
(without reference to a specific behavior).
Typical general praise included saying, "That's
good," or smiling, winking, and calling on students
when they asked for recognition. Praise
could have been delivered to an individual, the
whole class, or to a subgroup of students within
the class. In all cases, however, teacher responses
were scored as praise only if directed to students
when they were attending.
After allowing for adaptation, baseline data
were collected each year during the last 2 weeks
in November and the first week in December.
Three observations, one per week, were made in
each of the four classrooms (two project and
two barometer) in each school during that
period. An interim assessment consisting of three
observations in all schools was made during
February, and the final assessment, again consisting
of three observations, was completed during
the last 3 weeks of May 1978, 1979, and
1980 following the same procedures used for
baseline.
Interobserver agreement. Observer reliability
assessments initially occurred during observer
training with a videotape of a fifth-grade classroom
The observers had to obtain an agreement
coefficient of at least .85 with a scoring key before
observing a live classroom. More than 20
reliability assessments for student and teacher
behavior were also completed during the adaptation,
baseline, interim, and final observation
periods. Each school consultant and a trained
individual unfamiliar with the project simultaneously
observed a classroom and independently
recorded student and teacher behavior.
Each reliability session lasted 20 min. The interobserver
agreement was calculated by dividing
the number of agreements by the number of
disagreements for scored intervals (occurrences
only) and ranged from .86 to 1.0 with a mean
of .93.
Procedure
The schedule of implementation of staff development
activities is summarized in Table 1.
The table shows that the frequency of workshops
and consultation contacts was gradually reduced
over the 3-year period.
The consultants followed a standard procedure
in that they assisted teachers in implementing
programs that were either introduced in the
inservice workshops or described by Butterworth
(Note 5). In addition, consultants followed the
consulting format outlined in Table 2 and
elaborated in Behavioral Consulting (Mayer &
McGookin, Note 4).
First project year (1977-1978). After baseline
data collection, the project consultants began
visiting and consulting with each project classroom
teacher in the experimental schools on an
average of twice a week. They arranged and conducted
approximately two team meetings per
month at each school. These were attended by
359
G. ROY MAYER et al.
Table I
Summary of Schedule of Staff Development Activities
Workshop Frequency
Number of Participants/ of Con-
Year 1 Workshops School sultation
Group I 10 principal twice a
psychologist week
2 project
teachers
Group II 0 none none
Year 2
Group I 3 principal once a
psychologist week
Group II 10 principal twice a
psychologist week
2 project
teachers
Year 3
Group I 5 principals every
and and other
Group II psychologists week
the project consultant, the principal, the two
project teachers, and usually two or three other
interested staff members. Each team attempted
to identify and eliminate the conditions that
foster vandalism and that hinder academic and
personal-social development. This process involved
working with the school staff in developing
classroom and schoolwide programs that
would teach students alternative behavior to
vandalism and disruption. For example, lunchroom
and playground management programs
and classroom management programs were
planned that stressed the use of specific positive
reinforcement (Bernhart & Forehand, 1975),
with students being informed as to which of
their behaviors were being reinforced or recognized.
The teams also planned community activities,
such as neighborhood walks, to inform citizens
of the school's concern with stopping
vandalism and to solicit their cooperation. Involvement
by youth clubs was sought in some
schools to help keep the campus clean and to
decide how to use money saved from reduced
vandalism costs. These programs are described
in detail elsewhere by Butterworth (Note 5).
Ten workshops were presented between the
middle of October and the end of May. The three
Table 2
Elements of Effective Consulting
1. Establish a professional working relationship and
develop rapport (communication skills).
Reflection of content and affect
Pace of speech
Summarizing
"I" messages
Posture, eye contact, facial expression, and
other nonverbal behaviors
How to take notes
Clarifying
Confrontation
2. Identify behaviors of concern and goals.
Role of clarification
Begin to operationalize
3. Start contingency analysis during interview.
4. Observe behaviors in classroom situation.
Contingency analysis of student behavior
Contingency analysis of teacher behavior
Measuring rate of target behavior (optional)
5. Confer with teacher; discuss what has been tried
and to what degree.
6. Jointly develop treatment strategy (goal for
teacher).
7. Develop and apply strategies to facilitate treatment.
Reinforcing consultees
Utilizing a variety of reinforcing sources from
the natural environment
Shaping
Cues, prompts, and modeling
Providing feedback
Uses of data
8. (Optional) Observe and record frequency of target
behaviors.
9. Develop and apply strategies to facilitate treatment
maintenance.
Fading
Generalization
Scheduling
10. Share results!
introductory workshops scheduled prior to the
onset of treatment did not include programs and
strategies for dealing with discipline and vandalism
problems. Rather, these workshops introduced
consultation skills that participants used
to assist teachers in implementing the treatment
strategies which were not presented until after
baseline. Because of the holidays during December
and planning necessary for program implementation
and enlisting student involvement,
teachers and school teams were unable
360
SCHOOL VANDALISM AND DISCIPLINE
to start implementing programs until January.
For this reason, vandalism costs prior to January
1 (see Figure 1) were attributed to pretreatment
effects.
Funds were provided to the districts to be ased
to hire substitutes for the 18 teachers attending
the training sessions. Only the school psychologists
and counselors were requested to attend all
10 workshops. Activities at four of their meetings
included learning and practicing behavioral
consultation skills and analyzing school and
classroom environments (Mayer & McGookin,
Note 4), and sharing alternative strategies and
materials used by teachers to improve classroom
environments (Kaplan, Kohfeldt, & Sturla,
1974; Sulzer-Azaroff & Mayer, 1977). These
meetings were also attended by one or two of
the school principals, although principals were
not required to attend. Four of the 10 meetings
were designed for the entire school team (principal,
psychologist, or counselor, or both, and
two project teachers) to deal with classroom and
schoolwide discipline and vandalism problems
encountered by different schools. Attendance at
these meetings was close to 100%. The first
team workshop began immediately after the collection
of baseline data. A presentation of preliminary
results was given at the last meeting
for the principals, psychologists, and counselors.
The content of all 10 workshops is described
elsewhere (Butterworth, Note 5; Nafpaktitis,
Mayer, Butterworth, & Jones, Note 6) and was
presented through lecture, audiovisual materials,
and simulation activities. Tables 2 and 3 list the
topics included.
None of the other teachers in the school, including
the barometer teachers, attended the offcampus
workshops. However, any teacher was
welcome to receive consultation services on request.
Typically three to five teachers in a school
requested and received such services each year
with usually one of these being a barometer
teacher.
Second project year (1978-1979). The treatment
that was given to the 1977-1978 experimental
schools during the first year was pro-
Table 3
Topics and activities included in team training workshops.
Behavioral Concepts
Conditions that engender school vandalism and disruption
Antivandalism programs
Positive reinforcement
Methods of identifying reinforcers
Negative reinforcement
Extinction
Reinforcing alternative responses
Modeling
Differential reinforcement of low rates
Differential reinforcement of other responses
Response cost
Time-out
Overcorrection
Punishment and its side effects
Practical Applications
Using certificates and awards
Improving staff morale
Teaching students to get positive recognition
Teaching students to reinforce teachers
Readability assessment procedures
Adapting material to student reading level
Positive reinforcement bombardment
Secret Pal Game
I Spy Game
Good Behavior Game
Slot Machine Game
Other group contingency games and programs
Token systems
Daily report cards
School discipline plans
vided for the control, or Group II schools, during
the second year of the project. Group I schools
were provided three off-campus workshops
which only the psychologist and principal were
requested to attend. These workshops were intended
to provide a follow-up to the work begun
the previous year and to invite the participants
to share programs and projects going on at their
sites.
Consulting with school site personnel began
during October 1978 in the Group I schools, because
treatment had already started the previous
year. Through on-campus team meetings, assessment
of present school needs was made, and
the previous year's schoolwide programs (i.e.,
cafeteria or playground improvement, reducG.
ROY MAYER et al.
tion in tardiness, community improvement) were
reevaluated. Consultants visited each project
classroom on the average of once a week to assist
the teacher in implementing programs or to
collect observational data.
While consulting in the experimental schools,
some of the project staff collaborated with the
team that had been involved in the county workshops
in conducting several workshops directly
in the schools. These were attended by an interested
staff and covered material similar to that
of the original workshops. An average of two
such workshops was held in almost every school.
Third project year (1979-1980). Consulting
began in early October 1979, and continued
through May 1980 in the remaining 11 schools
at a reduced rate. Each consultant was required
to spend one-half day every other week at each
school as services continued to be phased out.
Team meetings were organized and scheduled
every 2 to 4 weeks. At these meetings, possible
additions to and changes in existing schoolwide
behavior improvement programs were discussed
and planned. Consultants endeavored to work
closely with the school psychologist, when available,
and with the principal, while modeling
consulting behavior and providing feedback and
reinforcement to all who were involved in behavior
change programs. Efforts were continued,
as in prior years, to include as many site personnel
as were willing to participate, including
student groups.
A series of five workshops was presented, and
involved interested principals and psychologists.
Four of these workshops offered instruction in
improving consultation skills (see Table 2 and
Mayer & McGookin, Note 4) to enable the
principals and psychologists to enhance their
ability to continue the project at its termination.
The material was presented through lecture, simulation
activities by project staff, and role playing
by participants. The fifth workshop was set
aside as a sharing period, and project participants
were invited to discuss programs and
projects going on at their sites.
Feedback to teachers. During the first year
of the project, behavioral data on teachers' types
and amount of praise and students' behavior
were graphed and shared with the project teachers
in the experimental schools. During years
two and three, this feedback was given to all
project teachers. A minimum of three informal
meetings between the consultant and each individual
project teacher (except in control schools
the first year) were held each year to discuss the
behavioral data. Feedback was accompanied by
social praise to maximize its usefulness (Cossairt,
Hall, & Hopkins, 1973). During the third
year only, barometer teachers were informed
by the consultant that these data ware available
from the consultant if they were interested in
receiving them.
Experimental Design
The intervention program consisted of a
"package" including inservice training of selected
staff members, on-site consultation with
selected teachers, consultation with other teachers
who requested service, and establishing a
team at each school to develop schoolwide programs.
The experimental design was applied to
the total intervention "package" without an
analysis of the relative contributions by individual
components to outcomes. A delayed
treatment control (multiple baseline) design was
used with schools randomly assigned to control
and experimental conditions. The pre-post gain
score variables were also compared between the
control and experimental groups. In the case of
vandalism cost, the number of schools that increased
or decreased was compared. Thus, a
number of different analyses were permitted due
to the large sample sizes.
RESULTS
Vandalism
First year. For each school the average
monthly vandalism cost per 100 students during
January through May 1978 (the time span that
the full complement of personnel were involved
in program implementation) was subtracted
362
SCHOOL VANDALISM AND DISCIPLINE
from the average monthly vandalism cost per
100 students during September through December
1977 (the "baseline" period for schools receiving
treatment for the first year). Each school
was identified as having increased or decreased
in cost of vandalism. According to this analysis
during the first year of the experiment, vandalism
decreased in six of nine schools receiving
treatment but in only one of nine schools not receiving
treatment. Application of the Fisher Exact
Probability Test (Seigel, 1956), selected for
its suitability with discrete ordinal data of small
sample size, determined that significantly more
treated than untreated schools experienced a decrease
in the cost of repairing or replacing vandalized
property (p < .05).
Second year. For the schools that began receiving
treatment in January 1979 (Group II),
the average monthly vandalism cost per 100
students during January through May 1979 was
subtracted from the average monthly vandalism
cost per 100 students during September through
December 1978. On this basis, each of these
schools was identified as having increased or decreased
in costs of vandalism during the second
year of the experiment. It was previously determined
that one of nine of these schools improved
without treatment during their first year
as controls in the study. This compared with
five of seven of the same schools that improved
after treatment during the second year. Application
of the Fisher Exact Probability Test indicated
that significantly more schools experienced
a decrease in the cost of vandalism after treatment
(i.e., the second year) than before treatment
(i.e., the first year) (p < .05).
All three years. Figure 1 shows the dollar
cost per 100 students of repairing and replacing
vandalized property (without adjusting for inflation)
for all schools that participated in the
study for at least 2 years. The graphs covering
all three years of the study indicate that 10 out
of 13 schools (schools A, B, C, E, G, H, I, J, L,
& M) receiving treatment experienced decreases
in the cost of vandalism or maintained their very
low levels during intensive staff training. These
included all the schools with vandalism greater
than $200/100 students in any month of baseline.
Two schools (schools D and K) showed
increases, and one school (school F) showed
little change during intensive staff training.
During the entire follow-up period, six of the 10
schools remaining in the study maintained vandalism
cost reductions (schools A, B, G, H, Iexcept
one month, & J), one increased (school
F), and three showed little change (C, E, & M)
from baseline. However, with inflation, costs
would be expected to increase over the 3-year
period, not remain about the same. Thus, the
treatment package appears to have been effective
in nine of the 10 schools.
Generally there is less vandalism from September
through December than from January
through May. This finding has been consistently
borne out by data collected by the office of the
Los Angeles County Superintendent of Schools.
For example, the average for all Los Angeles
County Schools was $766,917/mo in vandalism
costs during September through December 1980,
and $1,004,667/mo during January through
May 1981. Thus, when interpreting the graphed
data, it is best to compare treatment months back
to the same nontreatment months.
Comparing the baseline period September
through December with the same months during
treatment years shows the effect of treatment
in reducing vandalism in Group I schools. A
similar comparison can be made between the
January through May period for Group II
schools. Thus, maximal reduction in vandalism
costs occurred following the onset of treatment
in both experimental groups.
Table 4 depicts a further analysis of the cost
data. The initial average mean cost during the
1977 baseline period of September through December
for Group I schools was compared to
the same time periods during treatment for 1978
and 1979. A similar comparison was done for
Group II schools. However, these schools had a
much longer baseline and received treatment
only from January through May in 1979. Thus,
the 1978 January through May baseline for
363
364 G. ROY MAYER et al.
INTENSIVE
BABSAESLELIINNEE STAFF TRAINING INTERMITTENT STAFF TRAINING AND CONSULTATION iSTAFFTRAINING.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
8801.
400~1
200 SchoolA
....o...I l1 I - =_ ---- /-&\v -
87I
07
DO School C
DO School C
D0 SchoolOD
DO School E
0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
24804:
400
200 SchoolF
0 480
2400
CL
200 School IG
j 0
839
200 S
200 School H
200 School L
SO O *O MA MS 0, MOM 04 J\ , M M
200 School K
200 School.
200 t d Schooln
r p d o ws a l e S O N D J F M A M S O N D J F M A M S O N D J F M A M
1977 78 1978 79 1979-80
Fig. 1. The cost of repairing or replacing vandalized property in each school. During baseline, data were
collected but no staff development workshops and weekly or twice weekly consultation took place. During follow-
up, there were fewer workshops and consultation was available every other week.
20
20
SCHOOL VANDALISM AND DISCIPLINE
Table 4
Mean Monthly Vandalism Costs/100 Students
Group I Schools Group II Schools
September to Decrease from Decrease from
December Baseline January to May Baseline
Baseline
(1977-1978) $121.35 _ $77.12
Treatment
(1978-1979) $ 10.10 91.7% $14.29 81.5%
Follow-up (I) or
Treatment (II)
(1979-1980) $ 30.85 74.6% $26.00 66.3%
Group II schools was selected to compare to the
same time periods during treatment for 1979
and 1980. An average reduction in vandalism
cost for all schools of 78.5 % was obtained
without adjusting for inflation.
Teacher Behavior
Due to the large number of teachers involved
in the study, behavior observations of a teacher's
delivery of praise were averaged. The mean
of baseline observations was subtracted from the
mean of posttreatment delivery of praise for
each teacher for each year of the study.
A 2 X 2 factorial analysis of variance (i.e.,
elementary and junior high grade level by treatment
and control groups) was used to analyze
changes in teacher praise between baseline and
treatment observations. The following is a brief
summary of the results that were found when
teachers from Group I schools receiving treatment
were compared to teachers in Group II
control schools during 1977-1978.
1977-1978. Project teachers in schools receiving
treatment significantly increased rates of
praise by the interim assessment while improvement
by barometer teachers in the same schools
was not significant until the posttreatment assessment
(p < .05). Junior high school project
and barometer teachers showed a significantly
greater mean increase in their delivery of praise
than that shown by elementary project teachers
(p < .05). (The junior high school teachers
started at a lower level than the elementary
teachers.) Elementary barometer teachers in control
schools not receiving treatment decreased
their rate of delivering praise during the school
year significantly more than elementary teachers
in schools receiving treatment (p < .05).
The following results were found when teachers
from Groups I and II schools were compared
to their control year (1977-1978):
1978-1979. Teachers from project and barometer
classrooms showed a significantly greater
increase in their delivery of praise (p < .01).
Project and barometer teachers attained significant
increases in delivery of praise by the interim
assessment (p < .05) and rates continued
to increase by the posttreatment assessment
(p < .01).
1979-1980. There was no significant effect of
follow-up treatment on the amount of praise delivered
by teachers.
Student Behavior
Students were dropped from the analysis if
they were not present at least once during the
baseline and once during posttreatment data
collection periods. Disruptive behavior and nontask
behavior were combined and designated as
off-task behavior-the reciprocal of attending
behavior. Baseline observations of off-task behavior
were averaged for each student. The
mean of baseline observations was subtracted
from the mean posttreatment off-task behavior
for each student for each year of the study. (No
significant interim changes were noted.) The
G. ROY MAYER et al.
student was selected as the unit of analysis because
analysis of variance results are identical
"irrespective of whether group means or individual
observations are employed. The use of
individual observations also allows the exploration
of other interesting questions pertaining
to interaction and generalizability" (Hopkins,
1982, p. 5).
A 2 X 2 factorial analysis of variance (school
level by treatment) was used to evaluate changes
in student off-task behavior between baseline and
posttreatment observations. (A multiple baseline
comparison, though preferable, was deemed impractical
due to the limited number of observations
and resources.)
The following results were found when students
from schools receiving treatment were
compared to students in control schools during
1977-1978: Students from project classrooms
in schools receiving treatment showed a significantly
greater (p < .05) mean decrease in offtask
behavior during all 3 years of the study.
There was a significantly greater mean decrease
in student off-task behavior for the elementary
than the junior high grades during 1977-1978
(p < .05). Students from barometer classrooms
in schools receiving treatment showed a significantly
greater (p < .05) mean decrease in
off-task behavior during all 3 years of the
study.
DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSIONS
Statistically significant reductions in vandalism
were obtained for two consecutive years. A
multiple baseline design also compared the
vandalism costs of both treatment groups
throughout the 3-year duration of the study.
Because vandalism costs tend to be higher during
certain months than others, it is best to
compare treatment months back to nontreatment
months in interpreting the graphed data. Recognizing
this, it can be seen that maximum vandalism
cost reductions occurred only following
implementation of treatment in both groups.
Further, decreases from baseline, though somewhat
smaller, were obtained during the third
year, as shown in Table 4. These smaller decreases
were probably due to the double digit
inflation that was occurring at the time.
Off-task behavior (e.g., hitting, yelling, throwing
objects, not doing assigned work) of target
students in both experimental project and barometer
classrooms decreased from baseline significantly
more than did the behavior of similar
students in control project classrooms, throughout
each of the 3 years of the study. Similarly,
the average rate of positive teacher-student contacts
improved significantly more in both the
experimental project and barometer classrooms
than in similar controls during the first 2 years
of the study.
These findings are substantiated by a 1979
survey of the teachers and principals who participated
in the project. All team members were
given a questionnaire and a structured interview
was conducted with team members. Fewer discipline
problems, greater cooperation, and more
positive feelings among students and staff were
reported to be a result of the project programs.
The survey was developed and completed by outside
evaluators for the project and reported elsewhere
(Jones, Mayer, & Butterworth, Note 7).
The present study indicates that the total
school climate might be affected by initially
working with the strong, influential members of
a school staff, while making some additional consultation
contacts with other staff members on
request. Barometer teachers, a sample of other
teachers in the school who did not attend offcampus
workshops, changed positively in the
way they interacted with their students, giving
strong support to a schoolwide generalization of
these results. Unfortunately, records were not
kept of how many barometer or other teachers
requested consultation. However, several reported
events indicated that numerous teachers
were influenced by the project teachers and other
team members. Project teachers shared materials
with other teachers and involved them in departmental
or grade-level programs to provide students
positive reinforcement for pro-social be-
366
SCHOOL VANDALISM AND DISCIPLINE
haviors. Some principals suggested to groups of
staff members and individuals that they try activities
introduced by the project staff. Principals
also praised project teachers at faculty meetings
for their participation in the project. During
the second year, consultants and school team
members gave inservice training to all interested
staff members. Thus, the staff development
model used in this study appears to be both
feasible and economical. It is difficult and often
economically impossible to provide workshops
and frequent ongoing consultation services to
all members of a staff.
The intervention was also cost-effective in another
respect. When average vandalism costs
during treatment were compared with baseline,
reductions of 66-92% (mean = 78.5 %) were
obtained without adjusting for inflation. These
reductions occurred while schools throughout
Los Angeles County were experiencing increases
of 56% during 1978-1979 and 359% during
1979-1980 (compared to the baseline year 1977-
1978). When the data from Table 4 for the
1978-1879 school year were averaged with the
pilot study data from 1976-1977 (Mayer & Butterworth,
1979), a mean vandalism cost reduction
of 73.5 % for 23 elementary and junior
high schools was obtained. Thus, vandalism costs
within project schools were reduced by at least
two-thirds. A junior high school containing
1,500 students with an average monthly vandalism
cost of $121.35/100 students could potentially
save from $10,861 to $24,197 over a 9-
month period. (The $10,861 figure is based
on the two-thirds decrease only, whereas the
$24,197 figure is the estimated savings if the
vandalism cost had increased 56% rather than
decreased 91.7 %.)
Some bias could have entered into reports of
vandalism by school principals. Principals might
appear to be doing a better job if reported rates
of vandalism were kept to a minimum. In actuality,
it is quite unlikely that such biasing
occurred. On the contrary, it is far more probable
that data on vandalism costs from the "treated"
schools were biased in the other direction, because
the project staff visited those school sites
weekly and reported any occurrences of damage
that they noted. These were added to those of the
principals. Naturally, because staff were not
visiting the "control" schools at the same rate,
supplementary reports could not have been
added to the total figures. Thus, reported differences
would reflect an underestimate rather than
an overestimate.
Student and teacher behaviors were assessed
both in target and in barometer classrooms to
provide assurance that changes were implemented
and to probe for possible spread of effects
within the schools. Financial and other
practical considerations (e.g., training, supervision,
familiarity with contingencies in the classroom)
limited the number of observations made
and required that some of the observers also
participate in the consultation during the first 2
years of the study. Thus, it is quite possible that
their presence served to cue the teachers to practice
their skills. However, only two of the six
observers consulted extensively with teachers.
These two did not collect data in the classroom.
The other four only consulted sporadically. The
three people who observed during the third
year had no history as consultants to any of the
teachers. Further, the experimental data showing
improved student behavior also indicates that
the teachers' performance probably did change.
Thus, any reactivity during that period of time
was probably no greater than that which is
integral to any applied situation in which the
behavior of the participants is under direct observation.
No one study, of course, provides a definitive
answer. The area of vandalism involves more
complex and temporally distant behavior than
the immediate antecedents and consequences to
behavior emphasized in current applied behavior
analysis research (Wahler & Fox, 1981).
Further, any investigation that usese a treatment
package, or as broad an intervention program as
was used in this study, will have a number of
problems. Thus, this study should be viewed
as a beginning ". . . an inspection of global
367
368 G. ROY MAYER et al.
categories . .. a reasonable first step in methodology"
(Wahler & Fox, 1981, p. 332) pointing
to a possible direction of future reserach.
For future research, many modifications could
be made in systematically replicating the present
study. For example, even though it is almost impossible
to measure directly the acts of vandalism,
future investigation might attempt to assess
the reliability of vandalism cost and frequency
data by using two independent observers or reporters.
Also, some investigators may wish to
exclude verified accidental property damage
from their data. In the present study, it was not
possible to separate out those data because the
figures were obtained from totals reported to the
state. More frequent classroom observations
could also supply more valid means of measuring
teacher and pupil behavior, and permit independent
observers to verify the extent to which
consultants followed any standard procedure.
Because the treatment consisted of a "package"
of procedures, it was impossible to determine
to what degree classroom changes, planned
community activities, involvement of youth
clubs, or other aspects of the project were responsible
for the obtained changes. Thus, further
research should also attempt to tease out these
differential contributors to the effectiveness of
the program. In particular, we would like to see
investigations on the refinement and relative
contribution of various setting events.
The present study attempted to assess the
environment, to determine whether it was becoming
less punitive and more positive, by
measuring rates of praise delivered by teachers.
Behavior of other staff members (i.e., administrators)
and interactions among peers could also
be measured. Degree of match between students'
reading levels and the difficulty of assigned materials
could be assessed and compared or correlated
to frequency of vandalism and differential
costs. Similar investigations could be made with
other potential setting events.
The present study and a previous one by
Mayer and Butterworth (1979) focused on just
a few factors that might provoke school disruption
and vandalism. Because of the limited
number of variables examined and the global
measure of vandalism that was used, the magnitude
of the results is impressive. The data solidly
support the conclusion that educators can act
successfully to reduce vandalism and inappropriate
student behavior. However, much more
work needs to be done to isolate effective treatment
programs. We may find that certain treatment
programs are best suited to preventing specific
categories of vandalism such as theft or
property damage. Currently, we are attempting
to see if aspects of this approach can be shown
reliably to bring about similarly marked changes
at the secondary school level. It is hoped that the
conditions that contribute to vandalism within
the school can ultimately be identified and managed,
permitting us then to direct our efforts to
some of the factors that influence vandalism
from the outside.
REFERENCE NOTES
1. Attendance and Welfare 1979-80 Bulletin, No.
35. Downey, Calif.: Office of the Los Angeles
County Superintendent of Schools.
2. Project PRIDE Progress, I (1) (whole number).
Burlingame, Calif.: 1976.
3. Azrin, N. H. Aggressive responses of paired animals.
Paper presented at the symposium on Medical
Aspects of Stress, Walter Reed Institute of Research,
Washington, D.C., April 1964.
4. Mayer, G. R., & McGookin, R. B. Behavioral
consulting. Downey, Calif.: Office of the Los Angeles
County Superintendent of Schools, 1977.
5. Butterworth, T. Strategies for reducing violence
and vandalism. Project REVIVE. Office of the Los
Angeles County Superintendent of Schools. An
ESEA, Title IV-C Innovative-Developmental
Grant, September 1979.
6. Nafpaktitis, M., Mayer, G. R., Butterworth, T., &
Jones, J. Implementing project REVIVE: Workshops
and guidelines. Downey, Calif.: Office of the
Los Angeles County Superintendent of Schools,
1980.
7. Jones, J., Mayer, G. R., & Butterworth, T. REVIVE:
Reducing violence and vandalism in education.
(ESEA Title IV C #3969), Downey, Calif.:
Office of the Los Angeles County Superintendent
of Schools, 1978.
SCHOOL VANDALISM AND DISCIPLINE 369
REFERENCES
Azrin, N. H., & Holz, W. C. Punishment. In W. A.
Honig (Ed.), Operant behavior: Areas of research
and application. New York: Appleton-Century-
Crofts, 1966.
Azrin, N. H., Hutchinson, R. R., & Hake, F. F. Paininduced
fighting in the squirrel monkey. journal
of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 1963,
6, 620.
Bernhardt, A. H., & Forehand, R. The effects of labeled
and unlabeled praise upon lower and middle
class children. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 1975, 19, 536-543.
Cossairt, A., Hall, R. V., & Hopkins, B. L. The effects
of experimenter's instructions, feedback, and
praise on teacher praise and student attending
behavior. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis,
1973, 6, 89-100.
Gee, J. S. Community schools: Sunnyvale action
against delinquency. Crime Prevention Review,
1974, 1, 25-32.
Greenberg, B. School vandalism. Its effects and
paradoxical solutions. Crime Prevention Review,
1974, 1, 1-5.
Hopkins, K. D. The unit of analysis: Group means
versus individual observations. American Educational
Research Journal, 1982, 19, 5-18.
Horton, L. E. Generalization of aggressive behavior
in adolescent delinquent boys. Journal of Applied
Behavior Analysis, 1970, 3, 205-211.
Kaplan, P., Kohfeldt, J., & Sturla, K. It's positively
fun. Denver, Colo.: Love Publishing Co., 1974.
Mayer, G. R., & Butterworth, T. Reducing school
violence and vandalism. Guidance Clinic, June
1978, 11-15.
Mayer, G. R., & Butterworth, T. A preventive approach
to school violence and vandalism: An experimental
study. The Personnel and Guidance
Journal, 1979, 57, 436-441.
National Institute of Education. The safe school study.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Health,
Education, and Welfare, Office of Education,
1978.
Siegel, S. Nonparametric statistics for behavioral
sciences. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1956.
Sulzer-Azaroff, B., & Mayer, G. R. Applying behavior
analysis procedures with children and youth.
New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1977.
Thomas, J. D., Presland, I. E., Grant, M. D., &
Glynn, T. Natural rates of teacher approval in
grade 7 classrooms. Journal of Applied Behavior
Analysis, 1978, 11, 95-109.
Wahler, R. G., & Fox, J. J. Setting events in applied
behavior analysis: Toward a conceptual
and methodological expansion. Journal of Applied
Behavior Analysis, 1981, 14, 327-338.
Ziesel, J. Stopping school property damage. Boston:
American Association of School Administrators
and Educational Facilities Laboratories in
collaboration with City of Boston Public Facilities
Department, 1976.
Received January 1, 1982
Final acceptance April 21, 1983