The genesis of vandalism: From childhood to adolescence




Irina V. Vorobyeva, Olga V. Kruzhkova*
, Marina S. Krivoshchekova
Ural State Pedagogical University, Ekaterinburg, Russia
*Corresponding author. E-mail: galiat1@yandex.ru
This study was developed because vandal behavior is an increasing threat in the world.
Countries, commercial companies, and individuals experience great damage to property
as a result of individual vandal acts. In addition, vandalism threatens not only “tangible
assets” but also the cultural and historical heritage of modern humanity. Despite
the threatening spread of vandalism, the study of its psychological foundations, including
its origins, in the context of individual life courses is in many ways terra incognita.
The objective of the present study was to investigate the genesis of vandal behavior and
the sociopsychological and individual personality factors in the formation of readiness
to destroy public property and the property of others. A comprehensive study of
children, adolescents, and young adults (N=1522), as well as of their social environment,
revealed mechanisms of the readiness to commit vandal acts that were present
since childhood. The study was conducted by examining four age groups: preschoolers
(4–6 years), primary school pupils (7–9 years), adolescents (12–15 years), and young
adults (17–22 years); the instruments used were specific-age batteries, observation, expert
techniques, and questionnaires. We found that the characteristics of parent-child
relationship are is the basis for forming the boundaries of the permissible activity of the
child; disturbance in the parent-child relationship can lead to the development of forms
of vandalism in children. We describe the specificity and intensity of the vandal activity
of adolescents and young adults in the context of their environment, and we look
at the individual characteristics that promote deviant behavior. Thus, vandal activity is
not only a specific characteristic of adolescents and young adults, and it is not always
very destructive. Basic vandal activity originates in the early stages of ontogenesis as a
result of a deformation in social interaction that becomes fixed and converted into the
destructive actions of people trying through this form of activity to understand themselves
in social space.
Keywords: vandalism, genesis of vandal behavior, preschool age, primary school age,
adolescence, youth, personality and environmental factors in the development of vandal
behavior
140 I. V. Vorobyeva, O. V. Kruzhkova, M. S. Krivoshchekova
Introduction
Human beings are the only creatures on the planet who consciously and deliberately
alter the space around them. As a result of human activity the made environment
is created. But the desire for change does not end with creating this environment;
people continue to change it: they do not accept the fact that it is already given as
a result of others’ actions. By itself, the transformation of the environment can be
both socially approved and socially disapproved — that is, of a vandal character.
What is the reason for this particular type of activity, its deep motivation, its basic
requirements?
On the one hand, this activity can be regarded as the result of an attempt to
transform, create, innovate, or change, or to provide social or spiritual benefits to
oneself or other people. On the other hand, the reason for this type of activity may
lie deeper: a person may not transform the environment in a positive way but may
break it down. We call graffiti on walls offensive, obscene, or simply informative or
even decorative, but carving on fences, rocks, the bark of trees, benches is nothing
more than the unauthorized destruction or modification of the property of others
or public property (Vorobyeva & Kruzhkova, 2012). This is not just a problem
with the self-expression or defects of upbringing of some individuals. Who of us
didn’t write on the desk at school? But why did we do it? Because of boredom, as
a protest, or as the result of a special inner need that we did not express in other
ways? It is possible to answer these questions by means of complex psychological
research that considers vandalism not only when it occurs but also as a result of its
genesis previously.
However, there are only a few studies of this question. A small number of publications
concerning vandal behavior have focused on aspects of legal regulation and
criteria for qualifying destructive actions as vandalism (for example, Harina, 2005;
Pashutina, 2009; Shuruhnov, 2002) as well as on statistics and methods of combating
the spread of vandalism in some countries or areas of life (for example, Ceccato
& Haining, 2005; Pirozhkov, 1994; Shvets & Yakovlev, 2011; Thompson et al., 2012).
The number of studies of the psychological bases of vandalism, its personal and environmental
determinants, its forms and manifestations, its motives is quite small
(for example, Allen & Greenberger, 1978; Coffield, 1991; Cohen, 1973; Goldstein,
1996; Skorokhodova, 1999); such studies are centered mainly on the evaluation
of possible preventive actions (for example, Kalmikova, 2013; Patrusheva, 2010;
Skorokhodova, 1999; Vatova, 2007). One feature of the modern study of vandalism
in psychopedagogical practice is the relatively limited focus of interest of researchers
on the adolescence and early adulthood of vandals (Gurova, 2014; Samokhina,
2007; Tserkovnikova, 2011; Vatova; 2000) without taking into account its genesis
in childhood. At the same time, the consideration of the specifics of vandalism in
different age periods will not only create a more accurate picture of the forms and
embodiments of such activity but also help to identify predictors of the formation
of a vandal model of behavior. This is a necessary basis for the effective prevention
of destructive behavior because the already-established and implemented strategy
of dealing with vandalism by directives and judgmental methods brings only a
short-term effect, as vandals will always find a way to express their desire for the
destruction of private or public property.
The genesis of vandalism: From childhood to adolescene 141
Elements of the destructive activity of a person appear in early childhood. But
at this age destruction is a method of gaining knowledge of the laws and the characteristics
of the material world, the subjective environment. Despite the result,
which can be very close to vandalism, the child never considers this behavior as
destructive and antisocial because, for young children, the limits of acceptable activity
are yet to be determined and socially prescribed.
Later, during the preschool years, vandal actions can be a way of studying the
material aspects of the environment, of understanding the mechanisms of the behavior
of other people and their reactions to the destructive behavior, and of determining
manipulative possibilities to control the behavior of others. A preschooler
builds a prosocial behavior model by reflecting on the reactions of other people,
both adults and peers, to destructive behavior. However, excessive destructive activity
of a vandal character is seen here more as the result of a lack of education than
as a personal choice of the child.
When a child goes to school, vandal actions are often random, when children,
because of their lack of experience, cannot predict the outcome of their actions,
which can be protective mechanisms for the release of tension and stress arising
from educational or communication failure or excessive psychological pressure
from the social environment.
Teenagers, whom many authors consider the main perpetrators of vandalism
(Elliott, Huizinga, & Menard, 1989; LeBlanc & Freshette, 1988; Pirozhkov, 1994;
Vatova, 2007; Vorobyeva & Kruzhkova, 2014), are quite often prone to destructive
actions against a stranger or public property. Almost all teenagers engage in these
small vandal acts in their communicative environment, without ascribing to them
vandal values. Because the motivational bases of vandal activity are varied and numerous,
the choice of this model can be determined by a combination of personal
and environmental factors. However, the role of each of these predictors to date is
quite undefined and empirically not proven.
Adolescence is characterized by already realized vandal models of behavior
that are either integrated into an overall deviant personality or embedded in the
value-ideological component of personality that is formed by conditions of the interactions
in subcultural space.
Method
The total sample of the study was 1,522 respondents (42% -boys, 58%-girls)in different
age groups. These included preschoolers (65), primary school pupils (253),
teens (448 middle school students), and young adults (466 students in institutions
of secondary and higher education), also teachers and parents as experts in the
assessment of children’s behavior (5 expert educators, 10 expert class teachers,
65 parents of preschool children, 210 parents of children in primary school). All
students in the study were not active vandals, but of the adolescents and young
adults the majority noted that they had experience causing damage (major or
minor) to public property or the property of others. The basic indicators reflect
those of the normative sample in relation to the characteristics of the population.
Because the participants were children from complete and incomplete (brought
up only by the mother) families, significant differences in the manifestation of 
142 I. V. Vorobyeva, O. V. Kruzhkova, M. S. Krivoshchekova
willingness to vandal behavior between these categories of participants in the
study were not revealed.
The research methods were a battery of diagnostic instruments, questionnaires,
trace tests, and observation methods specific to each age group, as described in the
following sections.
Preschoolers
1. Our protocol for observing the child’s play. This protocol is aimed at determining
the characteristics of the child’s interaction with the world of things in the
process of communication with peers. It assesses the manifestation of certain
types of motivational readiness of the child to perform destructive actions in
relation to two types of objects: their things (toys) and other people’s things or
social things (toys). Valuations are based on a 5-point Likert scale, in which the
maximum score corresponds to a high level of preparedness for engaging in
destructive actions with the objects of the material world.
2. The Parental Attitude Research Instrument (PARI) of E. S. Schaefer and R. Q.
Bell (adapted in Russia by T. V. Neshcheret). This diagnostic examines parental
attitudes toward various aspects of family life (including toward their interaction
with the child). The questionnaire consists of 115 claims, in response to
which the respondent has an option to choose scale points from 4 “full agreement”
to 1 “complete disagreement.” The results are described by 23 aspects of
parents’ attitudes to the child and family life, including 8 aspects of their attitude
toward family roles (parochialism of women within the family — the mother is
concerned solely with the family; the mother has a sense of self-sacrifice; presence
of family conflicts; superauthority of the parents; mother’s dissatisfaction
with the role of housewife; “indifference” of the father and his noninclusion
in the affairs of the family; dominance of the mother; dependence and lack of
independence of the mother) and 15 aspects of the parent-child relationship
(verbal manifestations, verbalization; partnerships; development of the activity
of the child; egalitarian relationship between parents and child; irritability, irascibility;
severity, excessive rigor; avoiding contact with the child; excessive care,
establishing a relationship of dependence; overcoming resistance, suppression
of the child’s will; creation of a sense of security; fear of offending the child;
suppression of aggression; suppression of sexuality; excessive intervention in
the child’s world; desire to accelerate the development of the child). These 15
aspects are distributed according to the three major trends in the parent-child
relationship: optimal emotional contact, excessive emotional distance, and excessive
focus on the child.
3. The Parental Attitude Questionnaire of A. Ya. Varga and V. V. Stolin. This diagnostic
consists of 49 statements about parental attitudes. Respondents express
their agreement or disagreement with them. The description of the results is in
accordance with the following scale: adoption/rejection of the child (an emotionally
positive attitude toward the child indicates adoption; an emotionally
negative attitude toward the child indicates rejection); cooperation (adults desire
to cooperate with the child, they manifest genuine interest and involvement
in the child’s affairs); symbiosis (unity with the child, contact between the child 
The genesis of vandalism: From childhood to adolescene 143
and the adult); control (degree of democracy or authoritarianism in the adults’
relationship with the child); attitude toward failure of the child (the adults’ ability
to assess the child’s strengths and weaknesses, successes and failures).
4. The “Success” Program of I. A. Burlakova, E. E. Klopotova, and E. K. Yaglovskaya.
This educational program is based on observation of the child and diagnostic
tests. The technique diagnoses 9 integrative qualities of the child: curiosity;
activity; emotional responsiveness; mastery of the means of communication
and ways of interacting with adults and peers; ability to control behavior and
to plan actions based on the primary value concepts; ability to observe basic
common norms and rules of conduct; ability to solve intellectual and personal
problemsat an appropriate age; mastery of the universal prerequisites for educational
activity; mastery of the necessary skills and abilities.
Primary school age
1. A questionnaire that we devised to allow parents to identify the features of the
child’s interaction with things in the child’s communication space. This instrument
consists of 22 questions, the answers to which are placed on a Likert scale.
All questions are divided into three blocks: they characterize the tendency of
the child to destroy object, the child’s preference for things belonging to others,
and the child’s desire for novelty in relation to personal things.
2. The Parental Attitude Research Instrument, as described above.
3. Methods for evaluating the parental relationship.
Adolescents
1. The questionnaire Personal Psychological Sovereignty of S. K. Nartova-Bochaver.
This personality questionnaire consists of 80 statements formed into 6
scales: sovereignty of the physical body, sovereignty of the territory of things,
theories and beliefs, habits, social relations, and human values. Respondents
are asked to respond on a dichotomous scale (yes/no).
2. The profile Biography of Subjectivity of O. I. Motkov. This diagnostic consists
of five blocks that can be used to identify the level of subjectivity of people of
different ages on a Likert scale according to the following criteria: independence;
activity; initiative; creativity; ability to manage emotions, desires, and
actions; desire for self-development and self-organization; awareness of one’s
own personality; rationality; harmony of personality; pursuit of middle or high
achievement.
3. The questionnaire Motives for Vandal Behavior of I. V. Vorobyeva, O. V. Kruzhkova,
and S. A. Ostrikova. This instrument diagnoses 10 kinds of motives for
vandal behavior: aggressive, tactical, caused by curiosity, mercenary, existential,
aesthetic, as protest, caused by conformity, caused by inconvenience, environmental,
caused by boredom. The questionnaire consists of 80 statements, each
of which is evaluated by the respondents on a 4-point scale indicating their
opinion of the admissibility or inadmissibility of such behavior. The questionnaire
indicates a decrease or increase in the level of preparedness to commit
vandal actions and highlights the main motive for destructive behavior.
144 I. V. Vorobyeva, O. V. Kruzhkova, M. S. Krivoshchekova
Young adults
1. The Subjective Control Inventory of E. Bazhin, E. Golynkina, and A. Etkind.
This technique consists of 44 statements, to each of which the respondent expresses
agreement or disagreement on a dichotomous scale (yes/no). The level
of internality is diagnosed on the following scale: total internality, internality
of achievements in the field of failures of the internal relations of production,
internality in the field of interpersonal relationships, internality in health and
disease, internality in family relations.
2. The questionnaire Personal Psychological Sovereignty, as described above.
3. The profile Biography of Subjectivity, as described above.
4. The questionnaire Motives for Vandal Behavior, as described above.
Statistical analysis
For the statistical analysis of the results of the research package we used IBM SPSS
Statistics 19 and an additional module, AMOS. In order to solve research problems
we used the following additional techniques:
– descriptive statistics to reflect general trends in the parameters of the respondents
– two-step cluster analysis to isolate from the total sample homogeneous
groups with significant differences between them
– comparative analysis (the Mann-Whitney U test) to detect statistically significant
differences between treatment subgroups in the main sample
– linear regression analysis to determine the personal and environmental
predictors of readiness to engage in vandal behavior
– structural equation modeling to identify the overall structure of the relationship
between and the interdependence of (1) environmental factors
and individual personal characteristics of respondents and (2) indicators of
readiness to engage in vandal behavior.
Results
The compilation and interpretation of data through the use of complex mathematical
and statistical procedures and methods of qualitative analysis of the results
made it possible to describe the particular manifestations of human activity in the
context of the commission of any vandal actions in relation to private or public
propertyin each of the studied age periods.
Preschoolers
Observation of play and communicative activities allowed us to estimate the incidence
and manifestations of actions of a vandal character of each observed child.
The main indicators were the beginning of play with the child’s own and others’
toys; these observations demonstrated the children’s relationship to their own
property as well as to others’ property and to public property. To highlight the be-
The genesis of vandalism: From childhood to adolescene 145
havior of different groups of children we carried out a two-step cluster analysis,
which at a high confidence level divided the sample into two homogeneous subgroups.
The first group comprised the 77% of the children who had adequately
formed strategies of interaction with their own objects and the objects of others.
The second group consisted of the 23% of the children who showed abnormal behavior
in relation to their own, others’, and common toys. Comparative analysis
helped confirm the differences in the behavioral characteristics of the children in
the selected groups. Thus, the following performance measures of the activity of
children in the second group were statistically lower than those of children with adequate
behaviors: reasonableness (U=248.0; p=.036), harmoniousness of personality
(U=258.5; p=.055). In addition, for children in the second group the formation
of integrative qualities was lower on the following parameters: mastery of the
means of communication and ways of interacting with adults and peers (U=277.5;
p=.028), the presence of primary representations of themselves and of their families
(U=252.5; p=.007). Thus, the children who demonstrated vandal elements in
their actions had difficulty communicating with peers and adults; were impulsive
and often reacted inadequately in communicative situations (they were aggressive
or, conversely, too timid); had a poor understanding of themselves and the motives
for their actions; and may have had low levels of education for their age.
Through the use of regression analysis we obtained 4 models that describe the
determination of the child’s manifestations of vandal activity and the specificity
of the boundaries of its distribution. Thus, the overall index of a child’s vandal activity
was dependent on the application or nonapplication by parents of the type
of upbringing called “acceptance” (model parameters: F=4.8; p=.032; R2=17.1%;
β=0.267). That is, when a parent likes a child just as the child is, the parent respects
the child’s individuality, tends to spend much time with the child, approves of the
child’s interests and plans, and contributes to the initiative and creativity of the
child to the extent that the child sees fit. Furthermore, this index was also detected
in specific features of parental attitudes toward the child and the actual parentchild
relationship (model parameters: F=4.8; p=.000; R2=40.6%), in particular,
the mother’s development of a limited interest in the family (β=0.404; p=.002),
her dissatisfaction with the role of housewife (β=0.331; p=.013), dominance of
the mother (β=0.258; p=.051), egalitarian relationship between parents and child
(β=0.392; p=.013), inhibition of the suppression of the child’s will (β=–0.368;
p=.023), reduction in severity and excessive rigor (β=–0.358; p=.007), decrease
in the “indifference” of the father and his noninclusion in the affairs of the family
(β=–0.293; p=.036), restriction of excessive intervention in the child’s world
(β=–0.289; p=.054).
Interestingly, the child’s destructive activity toward the child’s own things
(model parameters: F=4.8; p=.000; R2=37.1%) and toward the objects of others
(model parameters: F=4.9; p=.000; R2=39.9%) were determined by a single
list of predictors: suppression of the child’s aggression (β=0.439, p=.011; and
β=0.377, p=.048, respectively), avoiding contact with the child (β=0.293, p=.025;
and β=0.323, p=.014, respectively), dependence and lack of independence of
the mother (β=0.504, p=.000; and β=0.491, p=.000, respectively), absence of
the mother’s sense of self-sacrifice (β=–0.324, p=.000; and β=–0.610, p=.000,
respectively), avoiding excessive strictness and severity (β=–0.244, p=.047; and 
146 I. V. Vorobyeva, O. V. Kruzhkova, M. S. Krivoshchekova
β=–0.287, p=.020, respectively), unwillingness to create an egalitarian relationship
between parents and child (β=–0.299, p=.041 and β=–0.272, p=.059, respectively),
and lack of desire to accelerate the child’s development (β=–0.275, p=.024;
and β=–0.249, p=.040, respectively).
Thus, the preschoolers’ choice of strategies for interacting with objects in the
environment depended on different elements of the child-parent relationship.
Primary school age
The questionnaires that were filled out by the parents of primary school pupils together
with photos of each child’s play space at home showed that the most characteristic
feature of the study sample was the orientation of the pupils, in their attitudes
toward the material objects in their environment, toward novelty (М=2.5).
Thus, the students could easily part with old things, did not worry about their loss
or damage, and tended to like new objects. The borders of their activity in this regard
were characterized by mobility; new objects were easily adopted, but there was
no clear identification of their own things and those of others; this situation can
provoke unauthorized use of objects and lead to the appearance of vandal activity.
In this case, the integral measure of the tendency of the pupils to commit vanInfantilization
Authoritarian
hypersocialization
Vandalism with
blurred boundaries
of personality
Preference for
others’ things
Newness
Rejection
Symbiosis
Optimal emotional
contact
Focus on
the child
Distancing from
the child
F1
е
е1
е2
е3
0.1 0.1 0.1
0.2
0.6
0.3
0.47
Figure 1. Measurement model of the connections between features of the parent-child relationship
and indicators of the child’s relationship to objects in the material world (Vorobyeva
& Kruzhkova, 2014b). Statistics models: CMIN=14.545; p=.485; CMIN/df=0.970;
AGFI=0.951; GFI=0.987; CFI=1.000; RMSEA=0.000. F1 — indicators of the child’s relationship
to objects in the material world. Thick arrows indicate regression of communication
in the child-parent relationship and regression in the child’s relationship to objects in the material
world; double-edged arrows indicate correlations with relationship styles in the family;
figures are the regression weights of the correlations indicated by the arrows.
The genesis of vandalism: From childhood to adolescene 147
dal activities was also the average degree (М=2.0), which indicates a sufficiently
developed strategy of interaction with the subject-object world: the child weren’t
restricted to the random commission of any offense but repeated it over and over
again. This finding confirms the analysis and the representation of children’s vandal
behavior in the primary school environment: observation of students in the educational
environment and expert assessment from teachers showed that about 27% of
respondents committed acts of a destructive or transformative nature at least once.
Of these, about 10% showed vandal behavior systematically.
Studies of the role of the family in the formation of the child’s interactions with
objects in the surrounding space, including vandal actions, were carried out by
structural modeling. As a result of the application of mathematical and statistical
methods, a model was obtained that contains parameters that characterize the system
of parent-child relations and indicators that reveal the child’s relationship to
the world of things (Figure 1).
Thus, the most connected of all diagnosed features of the interaction of the
child of primary school age with objects in the surrounding area were a preference
for others’ things, a tendency to systematically update the child’s own objects and to
depreciate “old” objects, and a tendency to destroy or otherwise vandalize objects.
Adolescents
A two-step cluster analysis (p<.010) was used to clarify the extent of vandal behavior
in this age group; the analysis detected the presence in our sample of three
subgroups. The first cluster (64% of the respondents) included teenagers whose
median propensity for vandalism was at the normative (low) level with a single upper
limit of normal for individual respondents on various scales exceeding regulatory
limits by 1–2 points. In the second cluster were the 23% of respondents whose
median propensity for vandalism was within the normative range but with a single
upper limit of normal for individual respondents exceeding regulatory limits by
5–10 points. The third cluster included the 13% of respondents whose median propensity
for vandalism clearly exceeded the statutory limit; the propensity of many
of these respondents exceeded the upper limit of normal by 15 points or more.
These subgroups were subsequently compared with each other with respect to the
strength of their characteristics of vandal activity (on the Mann-Whitney test).
The statistics showed that the teenagers in the first and second groups with
standard indicators of propensity for vandalism did not differ significantly from
each other. However, there were substantial differences in the adolescents in the
second and third groups on the following variables: a harmonious personality
(U=34.5; p=.025); resistance in difficult situations (U=33.0; p=.022), sense of
identity (U=39.5; p=.051). In the group with a high propensity for vandalism the
rate of vandal activity was significantly higher than that for the normative sample.
This finding can be explained by the fact that for teenagers the mechanism
for development is self-assessment and awareness of the outward result of specific
actions. Thus, damaging others’ property or public property can contribute to an
increased understanding of themselves and their capabilities; it provides training
for appropriate behavior in difficult situations and a generally positive assessment
of themselves through overcoming social norms and prohibitions.
148 I. V. Vorobyeva, O. V. Kruzhkova, M. S. Krivoshchekova
As a result of our analysis and synthesis of existing approaches, we can suggest
that the sovereignty of psychological space and the orientation of teenagers
on certain personality characteristics can act as preconditions for the formation of
readiness to commit acts of vandal behavior. For the mathematical and statistical
treatment of data we used multivariate regression analysis; the general parameters
of the resulting model were: F=12.4; p=.000; R2=10.3%. As a dependent variable
we chose the overall motivational readiness of teenagers to commit vandal actions;
such actions cause changes in the sovereignty of the physical body (β=0.202;
p=.005) and the sovereignty of the world of things (β=–0.108; p=.012).
Thus, it can be assumed that the expression of teenagers’ motivational readiness
to commit vandal acts is initiated because of the aborted sovereignty of psychological
space and thus is a violation of ideas about the acceptable limits of this activity.
Teenagers who have some problems understanding their own bodies and physiological
needs and are overall dissatisfied with themselves are likely to choose a
behavior that involves causing harm to other people’s property. Perhaps a compensatory
mechanism is triggered that arises from internal discontent with themselves
and their existence in the subject-object environment. In addition, deprivation of
sovereignty of the world of things also provokes vandal activity. Problems with the
definition of the boundaries of others’ property lead to unauthorized use. This feature
may form in teenagers because of a lack of personal belongings in the sensitive
period for the ontogenesis of this behavior. And if the first cause for readiness to
engage in vandal behavior and even for some awareness in choosing such behavior
is a teenager’s compensatory reactions and defensive positions, the second cause is
closely related to a violation in the ontogeny of adequate ideas about the world and
a person’s place in it.
Young adults
The young-adult sample was also subjected to a two-step procedure of cluster analysis
on the diagnostic data questionnaire Motives for Vandal Behavior (p<.050).
As a result, three clusters were identified. The first cluster included the 56% of respondents
whose median propensity for vandalism was at the normative (low) level
with a single upper limit of normal for individual respondents on various scales
exceeding regulatory limits by 1–2 points. In the second cluster were the 35% of
respondents whose median propensity for vandalism was at the upper end of the
normative range with many individual respondents exceeding the regulatory limits
by over 9–10 points. In the third cluster were the 9% of respondents whose median
propensity for vandalism clearly exceeded the statutory limit; the propensity
of many of these respondents exceeded the upper limit of normal by 15 points or
more.
To identify features of the representation parameters of the subjectivity of the
respondents with regard to their propensity for vandalism, we conducted a comparative
analysis of selected clusters using the Kruskal-Wallis test with a refining
pairwise comparison to the Mann-Whitney test. Nonparametric criteria were used
in connection with the disequilibrium number of comparison groups, and therefore
there are substantial differences in dispersions. In general, the respondents
in the third cluster, with a high propensity for vandal acts, had most of the char-
The genesis of vandalism: From childhood to adolescene 149
acteristics of vandal activity at significantly lower levels than did respondents in
the other groups. Thus, a smaller number were aware of their own personalities
(H=6.1; p=.048), had nontypical internal accounting requirements and external
conditions in the construction of behavior (H=10.2; p=.006), experienced dissonance
in the relationship of themselves and the world around (H=6.6; p=.037),
and lacked focus on the achievement of high results (H=5.8; p=.057). In addition,
pairwise comparisons of those in the third cluster and those in the second cluster,
whose propensity to commit vandal acts was expressed to a middle degree, revealed
a significant difference in the parameter diversity and interest in life (U=2040.5;
p=.032), which was less characteristic for the third group.
To clarify the nature of the relationship characteristics of vandal activity and
motivational readiness to engage in vandal behavior in the group with a high propensity
for vandalism, we conducted a correlation analysis (Spearman’s rank coefficient).
We found that mercenary motives for vandalism, which involve the commission
of such acts for personal gain, were linked to the desire for outstanding
achievements in various fields (r=0.457; p=.025). It can be assumed that a business
model is adopted by some people as a valid option because of their high need for
approval, ambitious goals, or tendency to perfectionism. In this case, the person
is ready to use any means to achieve the desired outcome. Protester vandalism,
caused by the desire to register one’s disagreement with something, was negatively
correlated with initiative (r=–0.569; p=.004), ability to manage emotions, desires,
and actions (r=–0.471; p=.020), positive emotional tone (r=–0.526; p=.008), and
willpower (r=–0.412; p=.046). Or perhaps the choice of an antisocial activity model
that was detrimental to the property of others or to public property resulted from
having a nihilistic outlook as well as from failing to regulate and control one’s own
behavior. Vandalism caused by boredom, the desire to occupy oneself with something,
had a direct correlation relationship with initiative (r=–0.440; p=.032). A
high need to realize oneself can give rise to a misunderstanding of a situation, and
the result is destructive vandal actions committed for temporary distraction and
entertainment.
The analysis of the young adults’ motivational readiness to commit vandal acts
revealed ten possible motives. One of the most prevalent was the motive of curiosity;
This motive was present in about about 21% of the respondents; they had
a pronounced tendency to choose vandalism as a way of studying the world and
themselves. In our analysis of curiosity as a motive in our group of respondents
we formed a regression model that explains it through various properties of the
respondents’ subjectivity (model parameters: F=8.0; p=.001; R2=80%). These data
describe the “curiosity vandals” as being emotionally positive, active, and sociable
(β=0.705; p=.013), capable of self-control (β=0.984; p=.002), but not fully accepting
of themselves as a whole person (β=–0.667; p=.010) and not agreeing with
the terms and circumstances of their life (β=–0.525; p=.005). In addition, they
are not capable of volitional effort in everyday life (β=–1.000; p=.001), they lack
initiative (β=–0.842; p=.004), and the most complete realization of their personal
potential occurs in stressful emergency situations (β=0.894; p=.002). This characteristic
leads them to take risks in potentially contentious interactions with the
environment. They choose vandal actions as a convenient way to get information
about themselves from the outside world.
150 I. V. Vorobyeva, O. V. Kruzhkova, M. S. Krivoshchekova
The results showed a complex subject-personal determination of vandal behavior
in the young adults and suggest that they not only can destroy and harm the
subject-material environment by such actions but can use such behavior as a tool,
a means of implementing cognitive activity aimed at themselves, in order to better
understand their own “I”, including in the system of social relationships.
The determination mechanisms of vandal behavior in the young adults were
identified by using structural models. A statistical procedure included two contrast
groups of these respondents: those with a strong propensity to commit vandal
actions and those who lack such a propensityThe resulting models allow us to
describe the direction activity (to the outside world or to oneself) in the context
of readiness to harm someone else’s property or public property and taking responsibility
for this activity. Thus, in the group of respondents with normative behavior,
activity had both vector directions: to the outside world and to the subject, and
the respondents expressed willingness to take responsibility for their actions and
results. Accepting responsibility in this way leads to activation of work on selfdevelopment
and self-improvement (Figure 2). Vandal actions then become unnecessary
because the transformation is internal and subject-oriented.
The group of young adults with a strong willingness to commit vandal behavior
did not have an internal implementation of vector activity, preferring an externally
oriented (environmental) expression of themselves. At the same time they are ready
to take responsibility for their actions, and the vandal activity was demonstrative
and of an oppositional character. The results of such actions are not analyzed, are
not internalized, and do not lead to internal changes (Figure 3).
Thus, young adulthood was found to be a period of increased tendencies to
commit vandal actions. In addition to the internal / subjective or personal factor,
the young adults were susceptible to social pressure in the environment and tended
Externally-oriented
activity
Responsibility
Internally-oriented
activity
Propensity for vandal
behavior
F1
F2
е1
е2
е3
е4
0.21
1.00
–0.30
0.37
–0.44
Figure 2. Measurement model of the relationships between propensity for vandal
behavior and the orientation of the respondents with normative behavior on certain
personality characteristics . Statistics models: CMIN=0.152, p=.927; CMIN /
df=0.076; AGFI=0.996; GFI=0.999; RMSEA=0.000; F1 — indicators of vandalism
in the external world, F2 — indicators of vandal activity in the person. Thick arrows
indicate regression in communication parameters; figures are the regression weights
of the correlations indicated by the arrows.
The genesis of vandalism: From childhood to adolescene 151
to choose vandalism as a means of identifying themselves with their generation in
opposition to the adult world. A more detailed study (Vorobyeva & Krivoshchekova,
2014) of the psychological readiness of young men to damage someone else’s
property or public property has shown that the key phenomenon that triggers the
mechanism of choosing vandal behavior is a disordered orientation toward activity.
Having the ability to work on this problem and change oneself can minimize the
risk of vandalism in young adulthood.
Discussion
According to the study. the preschool children who in their actions demonstrated
elements of vandal behavior had difficulty communicating with peers and adults,
were impulsive, often reacted inappropriately in communicative situations (were
aggressive or, conversely, were too shy), poorly understood themselves and the motives
for their actions, and may have had a low level of education for their age.
Some importance is attached to building a culture of interaction with the objective
world through the parent-child relationship. Thus, a mother’s concentration of
her efforts on family matters and renunciation of limiting her own interests and activities
solely to economic concerns allow due consideration of the mother for the
child and the child’s education, transfer of knowledge, and formation of the social,
activity, intellectual, and value spheres of the child’s personality. At the same time,
involving the father in this process, setting limits on the “power” of the parents to
restrict the child’s possibilities, setting clear rules of authority, as well as providing
a positive emotional background allow the child to acquire the optimum level of
independence and do not suppress the child’s practical activity but form an understanding
of the limits of its manifestation.
Figure 3. Measurement model of the relationship between deviant behavior and
the respondents’ propensity for vandal behavior and orientation on certain personality
characteristics (Vorobyeva & Krivoshchekova, 2014). Statistics models:
CMIN=0.131; p=.936; CMIN/df=0.066; AGFI=.983; GFI=0.997; RMSEA=0.000.
F1 — indicators of specific activity. Thick arrows indicate regression in communication
parameters; figures are the regression weights of the correlations indicated by
the arrows.
Externally-oriented
activity
Responsibility
Internally-oriented
activity
Propensity for vandal
behavior
F1
е1
е2
е3
0.34
–0.22
0.61
0.14
152 I. V. Vorobyeva, O. V. Kruzhkova, M. S. Krivoshchekova
The preconditions for the vandal behavior of preschoolers are excessive distancing
from them, suppressing their will and practical activity, and not making
reasonable demands of them or constructive contact with them. These preconditions
can be the result of lack of interest, indifference toward the child, or parents’
lack of self-confidence in their role as educators.
Adequate behavioral expectations are formed in families with a high level of acceptance,
optimal emotional contact, and optimal dependence on the family; these
families also provide adequate but nonexcessive care for their child. The choice of
passive strategies can lead parents to refuse to have contact with the child, to have
a fear of offending the child, and to exhibit a strong sense of self-sacrifice. When
a child commits acts of elements of vandalism, that behavior contributes to a high
level of parental evasion of contact with the child, a significant suppression of the
child’s will and attempts to overcome the child’s resistance, and the presence of maternal
feelings of dependency and lack of independence. At the same time securing
pro-social models promotes rigor, the desire to accelerate the development of the
child, and an egalitarian relationship between the parents and the child.
Pupils’ orientation toward things that do not belong to them cannot be considered
exclusively as a negative aspect of their personality. For example, young
children may choose others’ toys (in the presence of their own), but in this case
curiosity and the novelty effect satisfy them if parents use pro-social behavior strategies,
such as making requests, cooperating, sharing. However, there are opposite
options—deception, taking possession of another’s things, causing damage—that
are more closely associated with the kinds of negative behavioral patterns that a can
demonstrate in relation to objects in the environment. Our analysis showed that
the causes of these patterns are specific features of the parent-child relationship,
such as a lack of emotional contact between the parent and the child, the distancing
of the parent from the child, and parental rejection of the child. Accordingly,
we can assume that on the one hand the actions of the child may be dictated by the
objective need, significant for his age group, for things the parents do not buy for
a variety of reasons. On the other hand, numerous studies show that when these
types of parental behavior occur, the child has for the most part already been provided
with everything necessary but feels the need not for material objects but for
the attention and participation of the parents. In this connection, the preference for
others’ things and taking them without the permission of the owner can be a kind
of compensatory response to a rift in the family and, in some cases, can be a way to
attract attention . It is as if the child at an early age replaces a system of social relationsespecially
the one that was supposed to be a priori emotionally comfortable
and safe, more predictable, and already well established action systemwith material
objects in the previous age periods.
The child’s desire to systematically update the objective world on the one hand
manifests itself in regular requests for new things and on the other hand accompanies
the inadequate treatment of already-owned objects. Thus, the child loses,
breaks, gives away, or just does not use the thing requested and at the same time articulates
new requests. Such a strategy expresses the symbiotic position of the parent
and the child, which manifests itself in the parent’s effort to meet all the needs
of the child in order to protect the child from troubles and difficulties. The more
parents are focused on creating comfort for the child to meet the world through a 
The genesis of vandalism: From childhood to adolescene 153
wide variety of needs for a diversity of things, the less meaningful these things are
for the child. As a result, the child may have no realistic idea of the value of the
objects and the possibilities for their acquisition.
Preschoolers’ tendency to destruction and damage of items often appear as unconscious
vandal acts. In this case, the children are well aware of the process by
which these acts occur and most likely can predict the result but do not realize
that such behavior is proscribed because the objects are not their personal property.
Often, such objects are identified by pupils as “unnecessary,” and they do not
accord them any importance for society, a group, or an individual. Such a view
occurs when the parents maintain a maximum distance from their children. Probably
the lack of systematic interaction between parents and children, which not
only forms values and beliefs about the world but also generates awareness of the
child’s place in it, leads children to misunderstand the borders of their actions. As
a result, forms of interaction with the outside world, including the world of things,
are formed spontaneously in a child under the influence of situational factors that
can lead to feelings of mistrust and inferiority. The vandal actions of these children
are performed systematically and unreflectingly. The children are not aware of the
social unacceptability of their actions, and the motivational basis of this behavior
depends on the experience of interacting with the world that they received in the
course of their development.
Thus, vandal behavior is most characteristic of adolescence and young adulthood
but has a long genesisand forms from the early stages of ontogeny. Younger
children who damage someone else’s property or public property are not always
aware of the negative social meaning of their actions, but in this period the stable
installation of the intentional infliction of harm to material objects can take place.
Personality development is due largely to the social factor, the system of parentchild
relationships remains a key element of it in the period of primary school age.
It is precisely in these conditions that children’s pictures of the world are determined
by the value-semantic aspect of material objects and socially acceptable ways of interacting
with them as well as by the formation of mechanisms for reflecting the
social characteristics of children through their own things and attitudes toward
them. Destructive parent-child relationships negatively affect the development of
children and form their misconceptions about themselves and their place in the
system of social relations and in their relations with the objects of the material
world. Thus, excessive distance from or even rejection of the child initiates certain
behavioral patterns of destructive actions of a compensatory-demonstrative nature
in relation to other people’s things. Conversely, an excessively symbiotic relationship
with a child devalues the physical environment, both the child’s own things
and objects belonging to the society or other people.
Conclusion
Based on the results of the study the mechanism for the formation of vandal activity
can be suggested it has the following roots in the genesis of age development..
Because of the child’s special relationship with significant adults, the nature
of the child’s interaction with the subject environment is determined largely by the
parent-child relationship (Lisina, 1997; Rozhdestvenskay, 2002). When a child of 
154 I. V. Vorobyeva, O. V. Kruzhkova, M. S. Krivoshchekova
preschool age commits vandal actions toward others’ property or public property,
the child is guided mainly by an emotional outburst or negative feelings (jealousy,
desire to avenge), and the regulation of the conduct does not involve the deep reflexes.
Excessive control, lack of requirements, and subject-object variants of parents’
and caregivers’ relationships with preschoolerslead to deformation of ideas
about acceptable limits of the implementation of activity, which in turn contributes
to children’s choosing vandal behavior as a strategy for meeting urgent needs. In the
early school years vandal activity is latent. Changing the social situation of development
leads to children’s experiencing the effect of novelty. They are dominated by
social motives for educational activity and an acute sense of responsibility for behavior;
they are important in the eyes of their reference groups of adults and peers
(Davydov, 1990). This situation creates conditions for control and self-control and
makes it almost impossible for the emergence of actual forms of vandalism. However,
in this period the internal readiness of the child to consciously choose vandal
behavior in the future as a way to solve personal problems forms. Because of the
conservation role of parents in shaping the boundaries of the permissible activity
of the child, the presence of disharmonious parenting styles in a family creates the
preconditions for the emergence of psychological readiness to consciously choose
vandal actions.
Vandal actions are most evident among teens (Vatova, 2000); at this periodin
the normal development of the personality there are two options for the initiation
of such a deviation. In the first case, vandalism is a result of experimentation with
the social, objective environment or the person’s own capabilities and is characterized
by situational poverty; such behavior gradually loses its relevance for the
maturing personality. In the second case, vandalism is a manifestation of conformity:
vandal acts are a way to maintain social acceptance and identification of a
teenager in a reference group. Here vandalism is not an aim itself; for a teenager it
acts as an element or type of joint activity that creates a sense of belonging to the
community. Teenagers who have not formed at earlier stages of development the
necessary social and reflexive skills because of external conditions compensate for
their powerlessness and incompetence in the social sphere by making a destructive
impact on the objective environment for the purpose of self-knowledge his experiences,
opportunities and the other’s relationships with him and his activities.. Thus,
vandal activity allows teenagers to indirectly perform the basic tasks of their age
in order to form a self-image, but it simultaneously reinforces a deviant pattern of
behavior.
In the next age period—young adulthood—this model is fixed and compounded;
young adults continue to know themselves and their capabilities through the
transformation of the environment, including the unauthorized destruction of its
facilities. The energy that goes into normative development in the formation of
self-knowledge and is based on the trajectory of future life here is replaced by externally-oriented
activity, including activity of a destructive nature. In addition, those
young adults who previously chose vandalism because of group pressure reinforce
this behavior through their inclusion in youth subcultures, many of which directly
or indirectly commit vandal actions for ideological reasons.
The genesis of vandalism: From childhood to adolescene 155
Acknowledgments
This study was conducted with funding from a grant from the President of the
Russian Federation for state support of young Russian scientists and PhDs: MK-
4245.2013.6.
References
Allen, V., & Greenberger, D. (1978). An aesthetic theory of vandalism. Crime and Delinquency,
24(3), 309–321. doi: 10.1177/001112877802400305
Ceccato, V., & Haining, R. (2005). Assessing the geography of vandalism: Evidence from a Swedish
city. Urban Studies, 42(9), 1637–1656. doi: 10.1080/00420980500185645
Coffield, F. (1991). Vandalism and graffiti: The state of the art. London: Calouste Gulbenkian
Foundation.
Cohen, S. (1973). Property destruction: Motives and meanings. In C. Ward (Ed.), Vandalism
(pp. 23–53). New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Davydov, V. V. (Ed.). (1990). Psihologicheskoe razvitie mladshih shkolnikov: Eksperimentalnoe
psihologicheskoe issledovanie [The mental development of children of primary school: Experimental
psychological research]. Moscow: Pedagogics.
Elliott, D. S., Huizinga, D., & Menard, S. (1989). Multiple problem youth: Delinquency, drugs, and
mental health problems. New York: Springer-Verlag. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4613-9637-6
Goldstein, A. (1996). The psychology of vandalism. New York: Springer Science+Business Media.
doi: 10.1007/978-1-4899-0176-7
Gurova, O. V. (2014). Shkolny graphichesky vandalism kak sposob realizacii potrebnosti v aktivnosti
v podrastkovom vozraste [School graphic vandalism as a way to address the need
for activity in adolescence]. In Psihologiy i pedagogika v sovremennom mire: Vizovii i resheniy
[Psychology and pedagogy in the modern world: Challenges and solutions] (pp. 27–
30). (20th International Scientific-Practical Conference for Graduate Students and Young
Scientists.) Moscow: Moscow Research Center for Psychology and Pedagogy.
Harina, E. N. (2005). Rassledovanie vandalisma: Kriminalisticheskie i ugolovno-pravoviye aspekty
[The investigation of vandalism: Forensic and criminal-legal aspects] (Unpublished doctoral
dissertation in law). Moscow: Lomonosov Moscow State University.
Kalmikova, E. S. (2013). Psihologo-pedagogicheskiy profilaktika podrostkovogo vandalisma [Psychopedagogical
prevention of teenagers’ vandalism] (Unpublished doctoral dissertation in
pedagogical sciences). Moscow Pedagogical State University, Moscow.
Le Blanc, M., & Freshette, M. (1988). Male criminal activity from childhood through youth. New
York: Springer-Verlag.
Lisina, M. I. (1997). Obshchenie, lichnost i psihika rebenka [Communication, personality, and the
psyche of a child]. Moscow, Voronezh: Institute of Applied Psychology, NPO; Modek.
Pashutina, O. S. (2009). Vandalism kak prestuplenie protiv obshchestvennogo porydka [Vandalism
as a crime against public order] (Unpublished doctoral dissertation in law). Rostov-onDon,
Russia: Rostov Law Institute of the Interior Ministry of the Russian Federation.
Patrusheva, Z. V. (2010). Osnovniy napravleniy profilaktiki vandalisma nesovershennoletnih v
otechestvennoy i zarubezhnoy pedagogiki [The main strategies for preventing juvenile vandalism
in domestic and foreign pedagogy]. Scientific Problems of Humanities Research, 12,
172–177.
Pirozhkov, V. F. (1994). The laws of the criminal world of youth: Criminal subculture. Tver, Russia:
Priz.
156 I. V. Vorobyeva, O. V. Kruzhkova, M. S. Krivoshchekova
Rozhdestvenskay, N. A. (2002). Negarmonichniy stily semeinogo vospitaniy i vospriytiy roditeliymy
svoih detey [Inharmonious styles of family education and parent perceptions of their
children]. Bulletin of Moscow University, 2, 48–53.
Samokhina, L. M. (2007). Preduprezhdenie podrostkovogo vandalisma [Warning of teenagers’
vandalism]. Bulletin of Chelyabinsk State University, 2, 108–113.
Shuruhnov, V. A. (2002). Rassledovanie vandalisma [The investigation of vandalism] (Unpublished
doctoral dissertation in law). Moscow: Academy of Management of the Interior Ministry
of Russia. .
Shvets, A. B., & Yakovlev, A. N. (2011). Nekotorye osobennosty geograficheskogo isucheniy rsonansnyh
sluchaev vandalisma v sovremennom Krymy [Some features of the geographical
study of the response to cases of vandalism in modern Crimea]. Scientific Notes of Taurida
National University named after V. I. Vernadsky. Series: Geography, 24(63), 267–276.
Skorokhodova, A. S. (1999). Vandalism. Journal of Sociology, 34, 49–67.
Thompson, K., Offler, N., Hirsch, L., Every, D., Thomas, M. J., & Dawson, D. (2012). From broken
windows to a renovated research agenda: A review of the literature on vandalism and
graffiti in the rail industry. Transportation Research Part A, 46, 1280–1290. doi: 10.1016/j.
tra.2012.04.002
Tserkovnikova, N. G. (2011). Podrostkoviy vandalism kak psihologo-pedagogicheskay problema
[Teenagers’ vandalism as a psychological and pedagogical problem]. Collection of Scientific
Works World, 15(4), 19–20.
Vatova, L. S. (2000). Psihologicheskie prichiny i usloviy vosniknoveniy podrostkovogo vandalisma
[Psychological causes and conditions of teenagers’ vandalism] (Unpublished doctoral dissertation
in psychological sciences). Kaluga, Russia: Kaluga State Pedagogical University.
Vatova, L. S. (2007). Socialno-psihologicheskiy osnovaniy molodezhnogo vandalisma i ego profilaktika
[Sociopsychological foundations of youth vandalism and its prevention]. Moscow:
National Education, MPSI.
Vorobyeva, I. V., & Krivoshchekova, M. S. (2014) Youth vandalism as a form of personal activity
in interaction with the environment. Paper presented at the 28th International Congress of
Applied Psychology (ICAP), Paris. Retrieved from https://b-com.mci-group.com/Abstract/
Statistics/AbstractStatisticsViewPage.aspx?AbstractID=184426
Vorobyeva, I. V., & Kruzhkova, O. V. (2012). Psihologiy gorodskoy sredy [Psychology of the urban
environment]. Ekaterinburg, Russia: Russian State Professional-Pedagogical University.
Vorobyeva, I. V., & Kruzhkova, O. V. (2014a). Psihologiy vandalnogo povedeniy [The psychology
of vandal behavior]. Ekaterinburg, Russia: Ural State Pedagogical University.
Vorobyeva, I. V., & Kruzhkova, O. V. (2014b). Rol detsko-roditilskih otnosheniy v formirovanii
gotovnosti k vandalnomy povedeniu v mladshem shkolnom vosraste [The role of the parent-child
relationship in the formation of readiness to engage in vandal behavior in middle
childhood]. Bulletin of Tyumen State University. Series: Pedagogy. Psychology, 9, 230–237.
Original manuscript received December 01, 2014
Revised manuscript accepted March 03, 2015
First published online March 31, 2015