Three Ideological Orientations in School Vandalism Research




 ABSTRACT. School vandalism is one of the major problems threatening
 the educational system of various western countries. We review the
 literature on this topic and point out some of the difficulties that hamper
 a thorough understanding of this social phenomenon. We emphasize those
 strategies that have been found to be successful in reducing the incidence
 of this offence. We interpret the available information in terms of three
 ideological orientations: conservative, liberal, and radical, each of which
 can be shown to result in effective policies. The choice as to which strategy
 to employ on a national basis thus depends less on its proven efficacy
 than on the values and attitudes of those concerned with the problem.
 Hence, we argue that future investigations into school vandalism must
 adopt an "action research" approach, that is, research that continually
 assesses the effect that certain manipulations have on a specific school
 system. Representatives of all interested parties (teachers, parents, and
 students) must decide with the principal which particular strategy changes
 the existing conditions most favorably for all concerned.
 Over the last 20 years educators, policymakers, and the public at large have
 shown increasing concern about the waste due to school vandalism. The Safe
 School Study Report, published by the U.S. National Institute of Education (NIE,
 1977) noted that the estimates of school vandalism in the United States run from
 about $50 million to $600 million, with most estimates in the $100-200 million
 range (p. 3). The NIE itself estimated that the yearly cost of replacing and repairing
 items damaged by vandalism was about $200 million.
 Because of the costs involved and the implied detrimental effect on the educa-
 tional process, the problem of school vandalism has led to many attempts to
 discover why it occurs and how it can be solved. Numerous explanations have been
 offered and many solutions expounded. As is often the case in social science,
 disagreement is rife.
 It is common for school principals and teachers to lament the loss of discipline,
 the violent attitude of contemporary youth, and their apparent inability to respect
 property. More and more, alarm systems and security officers are employed to
 catch the juvenile delinquent, and calls are made for a restructuring of the court
 system or the proper implementation of (parent) restitution programs. Yet other
 The literature search presented in this report was made possible by a grant obtained from
 the New Zealand Department of Education and the Winnifred Gimblett Scholarship awarded
 to the first author.
 263
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:10:37 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 ZWIER AND VAUGHAN
 school administrators believe that the fault lies in the school system itself. They
 urge changes in the physical surroundings (i.e., building design and grounds) and
 in the school's social climate. Change in climate might follow from changes in
 curricula, size of school, degree of student participation in decisionmaking proce-
 dures, assessment methods, special programs, and so on.
 The inability of social scientists to pinpoint the causes or cures of school
 vandalism has added to the general confusion. Correlations exist between a high
 incidence of vandalism and variables such as the age of the principal (the older, the
 more vandalism!), teacher apathy, academic failure, a derelict appearance of the
 school, and community disinterest in school affairs. Hundreds of studies report
 what school vandalism is "actually" due to, and even more document many and
 various successful programs that can be put into effect; but there is virtually no
 consensus about the causes of vandalism, and even less agreement about effective
 methods in dealing with the problem.
 The present analysis' attempts to bring some order to this field by drawing out
 the theoretical and methodological problems that have plagued research and by
 offering an ideological framework within which investigations have proceeded.
 School vandalism is a complex phenomenon, the causes of which change with
 the ideology that researchers impose on it. Thus, although it is obvious that a brick
 actually does go through a window pane and smashes the glass, the identification
 of the reason(s) for the act, and what should be done to prevent it from recurring,
 presuppose social values and an ideological orientation in the investigator. Our
 argument hinges on three main reasons.
 First, a study of the causes of school vandalism can be approached on various
 levels of analysis. Let us take the analogy of a bridge collapsing during a heavy
 traffic flow. Was it due to an overstress of its materials (lack of foresight by the
 consultant engineers); to a traffic flow exceeding its rating (negligence by the bridge
 controllers on duty); or to a weakening of foundations through successive earth
 tremors (an act of God)? Such explanations may compete, may overlap, and may
 be offered as attack or defense in a legal inquiry. In a similar way, the question
 "Why does school vandalism occur?" can be answered by pointing the finger at the
 deviant individual, a particularly rigid and authoritarian school administration, or
 to apathy in the school and the community alike.
 It is our view that there is no criterion for judging that one level of explanation
 is more "correct" than another. They may be independently correct, or they may
 be parts of a chain of causal processes, as in Figure 1.
 Even where such a chain may seem plausible, there may be yet another chain
 emphasizing different causal agencies, such as poor background of pupil -> aca-
 demic failure - pupil-teacher conflict - vandalistic act.
 Second, social scientists are not immune from holding preconceived notions.
 They can hold an opinion about solving a problem and then seek support for both
 'Most of the material that the report draws on was obtained through a computerized
 retrieval system provided by the Auckland University Science Library. Their intercontinental
 satellite communication system taps the memory banks of a California-based computer. For
 reasons of access, the study focuses almost exclusively on studies from the United States and
 Commonwealth countries.
 264
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:10:37 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 ORIENTATIONS IN SCHOOL VANDALISM RESEARCH
 opinion and solution. The result is that scientific evidence can be obtained for
 virtually any relationship which common sense may suggest. If no such evidence
 exists, the resourceful researcher can predict that someday someone will discover a
 situation in which the correlation holds. Scientific practice does not need to consist
 of hypothesis testing in the "real" world, but may merely delineate the conditions
 under which a particular hypothesis may be true (McGuire, 1980). This issue is
 important in evaluating school vandalism research and will be raised again. Suffice
 it to note here that there is no criterion for judging which test (and which correlation)
 should be regarded as most important.
 Third, even a repeatedly confirmed correlation between a variable and a vandal-
 istic act does not imply a causal connection. Although more vandalism occurs in
 larger schools, not every small school experiences less vandalism. Again, largeness
 of school may be nested in another factor, such as largeness of town or teacher
 turnover. Although evidence may show a correlation, the basis on which causal
 chains are inferred is intuitive. In the theoretical murk surrounding school vandal-
 ism, there is no criterion for judging if a particular causal inference is justified.
 We will propose that, because there is no compelling evidence for one major
 cause or several minor causes of school vandalism, the choice of which variable to
 study or strategy to employ is ideological. The choice depends on, and to an extent
 characterizes, the values of the individual. Because ideological orientations are best
 known through political expression, we have adopted that terminology in distin-
 guishing three: conservative, liberal, and radical.
 However, before the ideological dimension of school vandalism research can be
 explored and its implications understood, we must note that studies in the field
 suffer from problems that make it difficult to provide a systematic, heuristic, and
 comprehensive review. Two such problems are (a) a definition of school vandalism,
 and (b) measures used to indicate incidence and trends. We propose a three-by-
 three matrix, incorporating the ideological dimension, to classify the numerous
 strategies that have been employed to solve school vandalism. The description of
 this taxonomy and a review of several cruder classifications suggested by other
 authors, namely Koch (1975), Marvin, Connolly, McCann, Temkin, and Henning
 (1976) and Rubel (1978), precede an application of the matrix to some strategies
 that have been used.
 265
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:10:37 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 ZWIER AND VAUGHAN
 Finally, some implications of our proposals are examined. Here we suggest that,
 because the study of school vandalism suffers from conceptual confusion and from
 serious methodological flaws, a radical change in research strategy is in order. We
 argue that future investigations of school vandalism must adopt an "action research"
 approach, that is, research that continually assesses the effect of certain manipula-
 tions on a specific school system.
 What Is School Vandalism?
 There may be as many definitions of school vandalism as there are teachers,
 principals, and social science researchers concerned with the problem. All such
 definitions are arbitrary.
 Panko (1979), attempting to obtain a consensus by sorting 2,516 statements,
 arrived at the following definition: School vandalism is "unauthorized intentional
 damage and theft of school and district property, excluding theft for material gain
 of the actor and associated damages, if any" (p. 592). Thus for an act to be
 vandalistic, it needs to be intentional or, as Thaw (1980) noted, "hostility directed."
 As such, broken furniture and smashed windows do not ipso facto constitute acts
 of vandalism, and certainly not if they are due to thoughtlessness and/or careless-
 ness. One can never be sure that a broken window is due to malicious intent, unless
 the vandal is caught in flagrante delictu.
 Moreover, some intentional acts such as scratching one's desk, are so common
 that they might be regarded as part of normal wear and tear. At an English school,
 it was found that 85% of the boys admitted to having scratched their desks, 65%
 admitted to having written on walls in the street and more than 25% confessed
 they had broken furniture or a window at school (Gladstone, 1978).
 The practice of adding up the costs of replacing broken windows, furniture, and
 fittings, and labeling this "expenditure due to vandalism," assumes that the damage
 was intentional and the action criminal. To regard the same as "wear and tear," on
 the other hand, can lead to reserving the label for damage to expensive items such
 as sound equipment or to damage that might follow from breaking and entering
 school buildings.
 It is important to keep this observation in mind, because a modification in one's
 definition of vandalism will affect the response strategies developed. If a certain
 behavior were regarded as "fairly normal," it would be sensible to concentrate on
 changes in the environment (e.g., by replacing glass by Lexan, a hard-to-break glass
 substitute), rather than to attempt a change in pupil behaviour (e.g., by using
 behavior modification techniques).
 Incidence and Measurement: How Do We Go About It?
 The fact that acts of school vandalism can be reported in various ways has
 constituted a major source of incongruity among the results of many studies, and
 signals the need for a standard record maintenance system (McCrosky, 1979). Most
 used indices are repair costs, number of incidents (i.e., break-in and entry, appear-
 ance of graffiti, damage or theft), number of convictions during a certain period,
 and self-reports. More recently, the psychological impact of vandalistic acts also
 has been used to evaluate their seriousness.
 266
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:10:37 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 ORIENTATIONS IN SCHOOL VANDALISM RESEARCH
 Each index of school vandalism has faults that are compounded when used
 indiscriminately. For instance, records showing number of incidents or monetary
 loss due to vandalism are subject to the ambiguity with which school vandalism
 has been defined: What one school principal records as normal wear and tear,
 another reports as an act of school vandalism. Also, it has become practice for
 some school officials to want to "hush up" the problem for fear of giving the school
 a bad name. It would also be consistent that because more vandalism is expected
 in lower socioeconomic areas, school officials would be more vigilant in detecting
 incidents. Finally, variables outside the system may further modify the indices:
 Young and Soldatis (1970) suggest that a decrease in the breaking of school windows
 may be offset by an increase in the unit repair cost, so that an overall increased
 expenditure may be reported (e.g., Steele, 1978).
 The idea that there should be more concern with the social impact of school
 vandalism than with repair costs deviates from the tendency to view the issue in
 purely monetary terms. Instead, it encourages people to take note of the social cost
 involved.2 Vestermark and Blauvelt (1978) have proposed a two-by-two matrix to
 show that some incidents can be high in monetary costs but low in social costs,
 and vice versa, and other incidents can be both high or both low in social and
 monetary costs.
 Self-reports are rarely used. When they are (e.g., Gladstone, 1978), they can be
 very revealing, especially with respect to motives and the relative incidence of
 certain practices. Yet they suffer the drawback common to all self-report measures
 when taken at face value: The extent of bias is not known.
 Even an apparently objective method of assessing the incidence of vandalism,
 such as the number of convictions per year, is subject to influence. The NIE (1977)
 suggests that in one case changes in the law were resnonsible for an increase in the
 number of offenses. Although it seemed that the nurt er of vandalism offenses had
 increased, closer inspection revealed a decrease in the proportion of vandalism
 offenses compared to the total number of criminal offenses (see also Stace, 1978).
 Added to the confusion of difference among methods, there is a wide variation
 in scientific quality of research projects. Some studies include control schools or
 schools matched on various criteria (e.g., Daniels, 1976; Mayer & Butterworth,
 1981). Sometimes specific sampling procedures are followed, for example, stratified
 (Daniels, 1976) or random (Schrock, 1979). Structured interviews (e.g., Hevern,
 1977; Smith, 1966) are conspicuous by their absence.
 When questionnaires are used, they tend to be developed for the specific study
 in question, making comparison among such studies difficult. This is despite the
 existence of two well-elaborated instruments: the Organization Climate Description
 Questionnaire (e.g., Kaiser, 1972) and the Purdue Teacher Opinionnaire (e.g.,
 Ellison, 1975).
 On the theoretical side, there are few truly insightful analyses such as Cohen's
 (1968, 1971). Literature reviews (e.g., Davis, 1972; Sturm, 1979) do little more
 2 This method has only recently been introduced and, perhaps partly because of the
 difficulties involved in the actual measure of social impact, has so far had little response from
 the educational community.
 267
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:10:37 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 ZWIER AND VAUGHAN
 than describe previous research and summarize correlational data. Although many
 researchers note many variables, most give personal, piecemeal accounts of how a
 particular school has dealt with, or failed to deal with, vandalism.
 To be fair, all kinds of factors, some inherent in the system and others imposed
 on it, can make a research project extremely difficult. A detailed enumeration and
 analysis of these problems would require a study in itself. Instead, we argue that
 most difficulties can be overcome by reconceptualizing the scientific process used
 to study school vandalism.
 Finally, the abundance of alternative reporting methods and types of research
 has led to widespread disagreement over whether the incidence of school vandalism
 is increasing or decreasing. Many (e.g., Sabatino, Heald, Rothman, & Miller 1978;
 "Violence in the Schools," 1975) hold that school vandalism is increasing through-
 out the United States. Several recent extensive surveys have found, however, that
 although there probably was an increase in American school vandalism through
 the sixties and early seventies, there has since been a leveling off (Hevern, 1977;
 NIE, 1977; Rubel, 1978; Steele, 1978; Watson & Darling-Hammond, 1978; Wilson,
 1976). The apparent increase in vandalism for a given community over time may,
 of course, dissipate in light of variations in reporting, measurement, and even the
 expectations of the investigator. The decision to use one measure rather than
 another seems to depend as much on its availability and ease of access as it does
 on personal inclinations and biases.
 The Ideological Dimension
 Most acts of school vandalism are against a system, the school. Blame therefore
 could be attributed to the individual or the system. To blame the individual is to
 emphasize the importance of preserving the system as is. The school system,
 according to this view, is functioning well. The same view regards the act as
 meaningless and likely to be executed by an aberrant, sick individual. Thus, the
 system is preserved, but the person's behavior should be changed.
 In the alternative view, the vandalistic act is regarded as meaningful and symp-
 tomatic of an important shortcoming in the school system. The act, although not
 justifiable, is a predictable response to a sickness inherent in the system. Thus, the
 solution is to change the system, thereby reducing or eliminating circumstances
 conducive to vandalism.
 Of course, most everyday instances of school vandalism are not blamed on either
 one or the other; the reasons for its occurrence are more often attributed to both.
 Only for clarity do we separate these opposing viewpoints (and introduce an
 intermediate viewpoint) in our proposal. Our matrix incorporates the three political
 orientations: conservative, liberal, and radical (see Table I).
 The conservative stance entails, by definition, the preservation and maintenance
 of existing institutions. This and the following definitions are taken from the
 Random House Dictionary (Stein & Urdang, 1973). School vandalism is regarded,
 like any other crime, as a threat to the system. Studies that adopt this political
 perspective identify the person as the cause of school vandalism: School vandalism
 is the intentional destruction of school property by a person or persons.
 A liberal framework moves away from traditional values and conventional ideas
 about the need to preserve and maintain established institutions at all costs and
 268
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:10:37 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 TABLE I
 The Relationship Between Ideological Orientation, Assumption Concerning the Cause of School Vandalism, and Type of Solution Offered
 Ideological orientation and assumption of
 cause
 Conservative
 Vandals are deviant. They must be
 caught and punished.
 Liberal
 The school system is malfunction-
 ing. Vandals capitalize on this.
 Radical
 The school system is debilitating.
 Vandalism is a response of normal
 individuals to abnormal condi-
 tions.
 Specific -- -
 Physical
 environment
 protection of school and scho
 grounds, employment of se
 rity officers and caretakersa
 (superficial) improvement of
 design, appearance, and lay
 out of the school and schoc
 grounds
 promotion of radical changes
 the structure and appearan<
 of the school, approval of p
 icy to decrease the size of h
 schools and maintain small
 schools
 Type of solution
 _n Diffuse
 School
 system
 Community
 at large
 encouragement and enforcement of involvement of community in anti-
 school rules, use of contingency vandalism patrols and (parent)
 contracts restitution programs, dependence
 on judicial system
 modifications in school climate, cur-
 riculum, and use of special conflict
 management programsa
 provision of student involvement in
 decisionmaking processes, adop-
 tion of changes in assessment pro-
 cedures, and exploration of alter-
 native schooling methods
 extension of recreational activities,
 use of school after hours for health
 and social services
 involvement of the whole commu-
 nity in school affairs, installment
 of community education pro-
 grams, improvement of social sit-
 uation in society at large'
 a The solution considered most favorably by the particular ideological orientation.
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:10:37 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 ZWIER AND VAUGHAN
 admits that the cause may lie in the school system. Possible causes may be the
 irrelevance of the curriculum, aggressive leadership by the principal, extreme
 competition induced by the grading system, and the teaching style of the staff.
 Finally, the radical stance is based on the assumption that the existing social
 system, of which the school is part, is in some way debilitating and therefore must
 change. The radical attitude is not Marxist in the sense that it advocates drastic
 political, economic, or social reforms (although it does exist-e.g., see Liazos,
 1978). Rather, it emphasizes that the cause of school vandalism lies neither in the
 individual nor in the school system, but in the immorality, violence, and general
 apathy evident in our society.
 Each of these ideological orientations is apparent in the literature. The conserv-
 atives will show that school vandalism is due to deviant individuals, who must be
 deterred; the liberals will produce evidence blaming the school; the radicals will
 contend that the disinterest of the whole community is at fault.
 The second dimension of the matrix (see Table I) denotes the level of analysis
 on which the solution to the problem is sought. Many researchers and school
 administrators focus on a specific solution to the problem, namely, deterring or
 apprehending the school vandal, or, better still, designing and protecting the school
 in such a way that no damage can be done. Others, however, have less specific
 solutions, such as programs set up to beautify the school or to instill pride, teaching
 conflict resolution techniques for teachers, special programs for students, encour-
 aging positive student attitudes, or involving students in decisionmaking processes.
 Finally, there are those who believe that changes brought about in the relationship
 between community and school will have an effect on the incidence of vandalism.
 This strategy is very diffuse: Any changes in the incidence of vandalism could be
 due to many variables. Examples are the involvement of the community in school
 affairs or in antivandalism patrols, the use of the school for after-hour activities
 such as sport or health and social services, and "community education."
 It is no accident that this level-of-analysis dimension corresponds conceptually
 to the ideological dimension to which it is juxtaposed in our matrix. We must
 remember that the identification of the cause of a social problem is tantamount to
 the discovery of its solution. In fact, at first we presumed that each ideological
 orientation would search for its particular solution, that is, the conservatives,
 content with dealing with symptoms only, would focus on specific solutions, while
 the radicals, intent on going to the "causes," would suggest diffuse solutions (Zwier
 & Vaughan, 1980). This is not the case.
 Our three-by-three matrix shows that each ideological orientation (conservative,
 liberal, radical) can be combined with the level of analysis (specific, diffuse) on
 which the solution is sought, resulting in nine categories. These categories provide
 the schema in terms of which we discuss our overview of the research.
 Previous Classificatory Research
 Social science researchers have made several attempts to tidy up the myriad of
 studies. One group of investigators, Marvin et al. (1976), suggested that programs
 set up to deal with student violence could be classified as: (a) organizational
 modification, which focuses on educational changes; (b) curricular/instructional
 270
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:10:37 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 ORIENTATIONS IN SCHOOL VANDALISM RESEARCH
 programs, which deal with students in need; (c) security systems; and (d) counseling
 services.
 Similar, but more inclusive, models and approaches were developed by Lemert
 (1967) and Cohen (1973a, 1973b), and extended by Koch (1975) to include the
 following strategies:
 (1) writing-off: the problem is insolvable, bearable, or too costly to solve;
 (2) functional alternatives: controlled destructiveness or other energy outlets;
 (3) technological: technical (e.g., bugging) or architectural (e.g., building design);
 (4) social structural: applies to rules, roles, communication, and grouping in the
 school;
 (5) educative: communication media and formal teaching;
 (6) legal-punitive: strict enforcement, punishment, and restitution;
 (7) therapeutic: treatment;
 (8) cooperative or primary participative: making the controllees controllers, or
 involving localized communities in youth control;
 (9) societal change: eliminating or minimizing crimogenic conditions in the
 larger society.
 The problem with classifying programs in this manner is that it is insufficiently
 heuristic. Although it is useful as a mopping-up operation by categorizing programs,
 it lacks a model specifying the unifying principle(s). Examples of such principles in
 science are the common lineage of species; similarity between artifacts; personality
 types or, as in our case, the type of assumptions embedded in each of these
 programs. Although the classifications outlined take note of assumptions, they do
 not, and cannot, specify the types of cause or solution (or strategies, programs,
 methods) that are being used; the dimensionality of the unifying principle is not
 explicit. By placing the ideological dimension by which causes are identified
 orthogonal to the degree of specificity of the solution, we derive a system that
 accommodates every instance and subsumes any system of categories previously
 offered.
 It is evident that the first program described by Marvin et al. (1976) is liberal,
 and the other three are conservative. The conservative programs regard the vandal
 as maladjusted, as a person who has not developed adequate skills to cope with the
 school environment, and from whom we have to protect the school, staff, and other
 students.
 Koch's (1975) strategies (1), (3), (6), and (7) are conservative in character, because
 school vandalism is regarded as a threat to the system. Although strategy (2) implies
 that the "need" for destruction can be in some way redirected, strategies (4) and
 (5) suggest that it may be transformed into acceptable behavior within the school
 environment. Both imply a liberal orientation leading to a modification of the
 school system. Finally, strategies (8) and (9) endorse a radical position because the
 potential school vandal and the community are required to be involved in organ-
 izing and running the school system so that the system itself is changed.
 Rubel (1978) provides an exception in specifying a unifying principle. He
 suggested a dichotomy between programs that assume that students can make
 rational decisions and those that do not. One implies that students should be
 included in, and the other suggests they should be excluded from, the decisionmak-
 ing process by which antivandalism strategies are implemented. In our approach,
 271
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:10:37 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 ZWIER AND VAUGHAN
 a program that excluded students from decisionmaking would be deemed authori-
 tarian and would derive from a conservative orientation. Our idea of a radical
 orientation is one that implies a collective responsibility of teachers, students, and
 parents, and certainly that students be involved at the beginning of the process.
 While Rubel's framework is not without merit, it is our view that an analysis
 highlighting the ideological assumptions concerning the phenomenon is more
 fundamental.
 Our orientation-solution matrix provides a new perspective for discussing several
 selected studies. Space precludes including program details of all of the studies
 referred to. Several, however, are chosen to illustrate in some depth the implications
 of our propositions.
 An Overview of Causes and Strategies
 The Conservative Orientation
 Pupils who commit acts of vandalism must be deviant. They must be deterred
 or, better still, caught and punished. Several preventative strategies may be adopted
 to deal with the problem. First, the physical environment must be protected.
 Second, with the students' cooperation, school vandalism may be prevented and
 offenders detected more often. Third, the community must become involved in
 antivandalism patrols and programs. From the literature it appears that most
 schools that endorse the conservative orientation have adopted the first strategy.
 The physical environment. Nearly half of the literature on school vandalism
 concerns itself with the design and protection of school buildings. Many detailed
 accounts have been written on how best to "vandal proof' the school (Irwin, 1978;
 Sabatino, 1980; Zeisel, 1976) and the classroom (Hathaway & Edwards, 1972;
 James, 1974). The illumination of school buildings is a favorite preventative strategy
 among school administrators (e.g., Falk & Coletti, 1982). Eight ways to prevent or
 contain fires are listed in Juillerat (1972), and more general information is given in
 "Arson, How To Defend Against the Most Destructive School Crime" (1976).
 A whole series of electronic gadgets are available to deter or capture vandals.
 Besides the more conventional siren or revolving red light, there are various "space
 detection alarms," such as microwave and ultrasonic sensors and infrared alarms
 (e.g., Faily & Roundtree, 1979). There are mechanical detectors, for example,
 magnetic contact switches, door buttons, taut wires, pressure pads, light beams or,
 among the more expensive, closed circuit television (e.g., Kravontka, 1974). The
 decision to employ these methods and instruments may reduce to a cost-effective-
 ness balance (Irgang & Gelber, 1981; Schnabolk, 1974), and may depend on the
 kind of damage being done to the school (Huntington, 1981; "School security
 systems," 1974).
 As with other strategies, the effects of alarm systems are difficult to assess because
 they are often used in conjunction with other methods (e.g., volunteer patrols).
 Their effectiveness increases of course when used for a dual purpose (e.g., as a fire
 detection service).
 Although most research appears to indicate that sophisticated alarm systems are
 fairly effective (Canadian Education Association, 1977; Jacobs, 1980; Sabatino et
 al., 1978; Sabatino, 1980; "Vandalism, a Special Report," 1973), some is less
 272
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:10:37 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 ORIENTATIONS IN SCHOOL VANDALISM RESEARCH
 encouraging (e.g., Greenberg, 1974; NIE, 1977; Schnabolk, 1979). In a survey of
 4,000 U.S. principals, many considered some of the more complicated electronic
 alarm systems undependable (NIE, 1977).
 One massive project focused on crime prevention through environmental design
 (CPTED). It took 4 years and $4 million to complete and was undertaken on the
 premise that "the proper design and effective use of the physical environment can
 be combined to reduce the propensity of the physical environment to support
 criminal behavior" (Westinghouse Electric, 1976, p. xiii).3
 The operating hypotheses, which we would describe as stipulations, were (a) to
 keep unwanted persons out (with locks and gates, signs and hedges); (b) to keep
 intruders under observation (either by means of mechanical techniques and/or by
 authorized personnel); (c) to reinforce certain activities or add new ones, making
 use of the already existing facilities (e.g., by encouraging interaction between
 students and staff, by promoting school pride, etc.); (d) to change criminal moti-
 vation by providing psychological deterrents and by promoting public awareness
 and involvement.
 Although the short time span and small sample size (four schools) makes it
 difficult to assess whether the exercise was a success statistically, the actual effect
 on the incidence of school vandalism was weak: Only one of the four schools
 showed a decrease in the number of incidents of school vandalism over a 3-year
 period. The other three schools followed the country trend of a threefold increase
 in vandalism from the first to the second year and a plateau from the second to the
 third. The authors state, "No reliable conclusions can be drawn regarding the
 institutionalization of the CPTED concept" (Westinghouse Electric, 1978, sec. 7,
 p. 65). However, they do suggest that "in future projects, a greater effort should be
 made to have key local resource persons-including students, faculty and princi-
 pals-play key decisionmaking roles" (sec. 8, p. 3).
 Notwithstanding the above, others have reported that schools employing resident
 caretakers have a lower incidence of vandalism (Clarke, 1979) and, conversely, that
 inadequate custodial services contribute to school vandalism (Brenton, 1975;
 Goldman, 1959). Principals often prefer security personnel over electronic security
 systems. In large schools, the use of the security personnel is highly recommended
 (NIE, 1977, p. 7). It would seem, however, that the successful custodian is interested
 in the students of that school (e.g., Ertukel, 1974).
 These results, however, cannot be generalized because the methods used are
 unscientific and usually there is no research design (i.e., lack of controls or
 standardized tests or choice of parameters that differ radically between situations).
 In short, the failures or successes of these projects do not bear on the effectiveness
 of the various strategies, but if any inference can be made at all, it is that the
 impoverished role assigned to students and members of the community could
 underlie many project failures.
 The school system. Instead of seeing the social processes of peer group interaction
 as leading to school vandalism, the same basic need for prestige and self-affirmation
 3 Although this project appears to focus on environmental design, and may conceivably be
 categorized as part of the liberal orientation, the stipulations made explicit by the authors
 reveal that a significant role is played by the protection of the school.
 273
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:10:37 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 ZWIER AND VAUGHAN
 can be usefully employed to fight vandalism (see "Conflict Management Student
 Leadership Program," in Reed & Avis, 1978). Two instances of this strategy were
 reported in "Ways of Fighting Vandalism" (1968) and by Ertukel (1974). The first
 of these described the "Youth Vacation Vigil," which watched over school property
 during the summer vacation months and on the celebratory night of Halloween.
 This program commenced when local police trained high school junior and senior
 students selected because of peer group respect for their ability as students or
 athletes. As "area captains," their task was to visit the various schools in the district
 and to inform the pupils of a planned antivandalism program. The purpose was to
 make more students proud of their school, thus stimulating their sense of respon-
 sibility. The effectiveness of involving respected students as spokespersons for the
 program appeared to be great. Over a 2-year period, vandalism expenditure in
 Akron, Ohio, was cut in half(from $10,000 in 1962 to $5,000 in 1964). The same
 strategy used in conjunction with several others also appeared to be successful at
 the Memorial High School in Madison, Wisconsin, where 97 vandalism incidents
 in 1 year were reduced to 30 in the following year (Olson, 1981; see also Clement,
 1975, and Ertukel, 1974).
 Another approach that focuses on building protection and student involvement
 is that of a "contingency contract," that is, an agreement between students and
 school officials that the size of the school fund allocation to students decreases as
 the level of vandalism increases during a given year. One such program was
 implemented at Alto Loma (California) Junior High. By reducing the school fund
 for each act of vandalism, the district's expenditure of repairing damages due to
 vandalism went from $40,000 one year to $7,000 the next year ("Vandalism: A
 Special Report," 1973). The project was hailed as so successful that it was introduced
 at other schools in the South San Francisco Unified School District (see also
 Fernandez & Cardenas, 1976; Kiernan, 1975). Similar success was reported in
 Liverpool, England, where members of a youth centre received financial support
 in exchange for reducing vandalism (Gladstone, 1978). While this "give-and take"
 exchange philosophy appears fair and promising, it does have drawbacks. Not all
 losses attributed to students are caused by students; some may be due to outsiders.
 Also, a few "bad kids" may spoil the contract by continuing their vandalism; and
 if funds allocated are used up before the budgetary period runs out, the contract is
 rendered useless, because the deterrent value of the program has evaporated (Rubel,
 1978).
 Finally, in the case of the continual offender, psychological treatment may be
 the best remedy. Indeed, some success has been achieved by psychologists using
 individual and group therapy, including several behavior modification techniques
 (token economy, contingency contracts, group guidance meetings). Brooks (1974)
 and Haney (1973) report success with behavior modification for some persistently
 troublesome adolescents.
 The community at large. The conservative orientation is apparent in the various
 roles assigned to the community in reducing school vandalism. First, there may be
 a concerted effort to enhance community vigilance (e.g., all parents may be asked
 and encouraged to report suspicious behavior). As is often the case, however,
 opposing conclusions are drawn regarding the effectiveness of this method. It was
 reported in a study in the Elk Grove Unified School District (California) that 17
 274
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:10:37 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 ORIENTATIONS IN SCHOOL VANDALISM RESEARCH
 schools participated in a program called "Vandal Watch." The program extended
 the original idea of community vigilance and antivandal patrols by providing cheap
 accommodation for people who would keep watch. Families in mobile homes next
 to the school buildings notified the police of anything suspicious. The 17 schools
 (with a student population of 10,000) were said to have saved the district more
 than $20,000 a year in vandalism-related costs. The program has been seriously
 considered by other school districts in California, New York, Hawaii, and Canada
 (see "Live-in School Sitters," 1974).
 Why, then, do we find in Nottingham, England, a group of policymakers who
 conclude that the consensus is that "anti-vandal patrols by parents/teachers should
 be positively discouraged and that closer collaboration between parents/teachers/
 police through PTA's might achieve better results" (Consortium of Local Authori-
 ties Special Programme, 1976, p. 5)?
 A second strategy involving the community, but resorting to punitive measures,
 is that of parent restitution. In 1973 the Los Angeles Juvenile Court sponsored a
 program called the "Prevent School Vandalism Project." This was an intensive
 effort to force all school vandals or their parents to pay for the damages done.
 Much publicity was given to the warning that the parents of the vandals would be
 taken to court and that the courts would actively assist schools in filing proper law
 suits. The program turned out to be a failure. Not only was it estimated that a mere
 10% of all school vandals in the district were caught but, of these, only one in five
 ever repaid any money to the school system (Sabatino et al., 1978; Tross, 1977).
 Notwithstanding the outcome of this project, 46 American states enacted parent
 liability statutes in 1975, 10 of which specifically dealt with the destruction of
 school property by pupils. It is, of course, possible that these legislators hope that
 such prosecution would have beneficial secondary effects, such as "consciousness-
 raising" (see Grealy, 1974).
 To conclude this section, apprehending and punishing the school vandal does
 not eliminate the source of the problem; dealing with a symptom appears to be
 ineffectual. Thus the Central Policy Review Staff's Report suggested that the case
 for punitive measures was "very thin," and that no evidence existed to indicate that
 harsh punishment would deter the vandal (Haydon, 1978). However, parents of
 other pupils and school principals who want to see justice done are not impressed
 by this. They complain about the leniency of courts dealing with juvenile offenders
 and about the inadequate support they feel they are receiving from the courts (Koff,
 1979; Wilson, 1976). For this reason, a restructuring of the juvenile court system
 may well be in order (cf. "Citizens' Juvenile Justice Task Force Recommendations,"
 1981).
 The Liberal Orientation
 Pupils who commit acts of vandalism do so because the school system is
 malfunctioning. First, it may be that the design of the school and the layout of the
 school grounds encourages students to indulge in vandalism. The solution would
 be to modify the physical environment, for example, by making it more durable
 or attractive. Second, the incidence of vandalism may be reduced by allowing
 pupils and the community at large to use the school buildings after hours. This
 could have the dual result of discouraging the pupils from vandalizing occupied
 275
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:10:37 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 ZWIER AND VAUGHAN
 buildings and keeping them off the street at the same time. Third, there may be a
 need for changes in (a) the curriculum (such as its relevance); (b) the way teachers
 cope with potential conflict situations or with teaching in general; or (c) the
 leadership style of the principal.
 Our review of the literature reveals that the liberal orientation has a predilection
 for endorsing the third approach.
 The physical environment. The school setting may increase the likelihood of the
 vandalistic act taking place. Zeisel (1976) even suggests that poor school designs
 (easy access, hidden alcoves, large hard-top surfaces) invite damage. This leads
 some to argue that perhaps more than half of what purportedly is school vandalism
 really is "non-intentional damage caused primarily by bad school designs" ("Van-
 dalism, a Special Report," 1973). So how do we make the school buildings less
 accident-prone?
 As the literature on this subject is much too large to detail in this paper, only
 two of the most frequently discussed variables will be examined: the use of glass
 and the age of the school buildings.
 According to Weiss (1974), a 1968 poll conducted by the journal Nation's Schools
 found that 69% of school vandalism costs went toward the replacement of glass.
 Many others have reported similarly high costs due to glass breakage (e.g., Canadian
 Education Association, 1977; O'Grince & Hodgins, 1974). As exposed glass is
 extremely vulnerable to playful or malicious vandalism, it must be replaced by
 something less breakable. Many schools have found the solution in Lexan, a glass
 substitute. The Canadian Education Association's survey of 47 school boards found
 that those school officials who thought that there was a downward trend in the
 incidence of vandalism costs attributed it to this glass substitute.
 Another variable thought to relate to the incidence and cost of vandalism is the
 age of the school building. The evidence for this hypothesis, like for so many others,
 is far from conclusive. Goldman (1961) found that a building's age was significantly
 related to damage: Older buildings were vandalized more often. This finding is
 supported by evidence reported by Cohen (1970), Cramer (1978, cited in Howard,
 1978), and Hevern (1977). Kaiser (1972) and De Buzna (1975), however, did not
 find such a trend. In fact, contrary data from a survey undertaken by the National
 School Public Relations Association pointed to more vandalism in newer schools
 (Wells, 1975).
 Overall, it appears that it is not so much the age of the school building that
 matters, but its appearance (De Buzna, 1975). Several studies, two of which are
 discussed here, critically investigated the effect of this variable.
 Pablant and Baxter's (1975) study is often quoted as rigorous in evaluating the
 effect that landscaping and lighting have on the incidence of school vandalism.
 Having matched 32 schools of Houston, Texas, on variables such as neighbourhood,
 income level, ethnic background, school size, and elementary versus secondary
 school buildings, they found that aesthetic quality and level of preservation of
 school property (regardless of age or architecture of the buildings) was negatively
 related to the incidence of school vandalism. Consequently, they suggested that
 little vandalism will occur at schools high in aesthetic quality.
 Earlier, a program developed among Baltimore City Public Schools (Lloyd, 1968)
 produced results congruent with Pablant and Baxter's. In this experiment, various
 276
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:10:37 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 ORIENTATIONS IN SCHOOL VANDALISM RESEARCH
 multiunit, relocatable buildings were placed next to the conventional brick-and-
 mortar school building. They were painted in bright colors and had what were
 considered aesthetically pleasing features. After a time it became evident that,
 although the old school buildings were heavily vandalized, the new units received
 little damage.
 One of the foremost theorists in project planning has been Newman. His book
 Defensible Space: Crime Prevention Through Urban Design (1972) has received
 much attention from social scientists interested in preventing or reducing vandalism
 in general (e.g., Mayhew, 1979; Stace, 1978). His basic premise was that people
 must feel that the environment belongs to them and that they can be proud of it.
 This increases their responsibility and their desire to protect the environment.
 However, his specific design suggestions have not always reduced the incidence
 of vandalistic behavior (see Reppetto, 1974; Mawby, 1977a, 1977b; Wilson, 1978,
 cited in Mayhew, 1979). Even where such projects have been successful, the results
 may not have been an outcome of the design adopted. For instance, an action
 project undertaken by the National Association for the Care and Resettlement of
 Offenders (1978) in Britain, originally inspired by Newman's theory, is reported to
 have concluded that "the improvement is attributed much less to the 'defensible
 space' modifications, as to the greatly improved community spirit and improved
 communications between local residents and the local council" (Clarke, 1979, p.
 141).
 The school system. Research has not clarified whether the school principal should
 adopt a "law-and-order" approach, with a strict adherence to rules, or a humani-
 tarian" attitude, allowing the pupils some say in the educational process. Wint
 (1975) gives examples of the approaches used at two schools. According to the
 testimonials given by the two principals, both styles led to a positive school
 atmosphere and a low incidence of violence and vandalism. So which manner of
 leadership is more desirable?
 An examination of other research clarifies this point. Goldman (1961) correlated
 teachers' perceptions of their school administration with the incidence of vandalism
 at their schools. Teachers in schools that suffered more vandalism thought that
 their school administration was weak and casual. In contrast, those from relatively
 peaceful schools regarded the administration as strong and democratic. In particular
 "the method and clarity of communication by the principal was a factor in the
 feeling of teacher satisfaction" (cited by Howard, 1978, p. 59).
 However, there is no clear-cut evidence of a correlation between a positive school
 climate and a low incidence of school vandalism: While Howell and Grahlman
 (i977) found a correlation, Kaiser (1972) did not.
 A factor that may eventually be found more important than student input into
 rule formulation is the consistency with which school rules are enforced. A
 Systematic Management Plan for School Discipline by Duke (1977) focused on the
 school as a rule-governed institution, and incorporated six strategies: (a) compiling
 accurate data on the sources and targets of student misdemeanors; (b) rewarding
 students who obey school rules; (c) teaching conflict resolution skills to help make
 students more effective in problem situations; (d) developing and maintaining an
 awareness of the school as a rule-governed institution; (e) establishing a team
 approach involving teachers, parents, and community, as well as students; and (f)
 277
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:10:37 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 ZWIER AND VAUGHAN
 providing inservice teacher education, in acquiring specific skills for handling
 problem children and in continuing to offer new ideas on school discipline. The
 specific effect of each of these measures may be difficult to determine. However,
 the superiority of consistent rewards over consistent punishment, the failure of
 inconsistent patterns of reinforcement, and the importance of learning through
 modeling have all long been established by research into behavior modification
 techniques.
 Teacher apathy (Kiernan, 1975), or a disinterest in their pupils (Cardinelli, 1970),
 a lower degree of identification with the school (Goldman, 1959), a high percentage
 of teacher turnover (Leftwich, 1978), many years of service (De Buzna, 1975), and
 even the older age of the principal (De Buzna, 1974; Leftwich, 1978) have all been
 found to correlate with a high incidence of violence and vandalism in schools.
 Goldman's (1959) interview with 367 teachers at 16 high schools in Syracuse,
 New York, is one of the classic studies probing teacher attitudes toward school
 vandalism, Damage occurring at each school was classified on a "damage scale."
 In addition, a questionnaire was administered to 1,170 students. In comparing the
 responses of teachers or students of two or more schools with a similar damage
 rating, Goldman found that teachers in high-damage schools held different attitudes
 from those in low-damage schools. In particular, teachers at high-damage schools
 were more casual, more critical, or less enthusiastic about the school. In answer to
 the question why some schools should suffer more vandalism than others, these
 teachers emphasized the role of the school administration, the age and location of
 the building, and poor teacher control in the classroom. On the other hand, teachers
 from low-damage schools emphasized interpersonal relations as well as the role of
 the school staff, the age and academic achievement of the student, the interest of
 the student in school, and the experience of the teacher.
 Goldman's research suggests that reducing vandalism may be contingent on the
 teachers' ability to identify with the school and to appreciate it as an integral part
 of the community. More recently, Mayer and Butterworth (1981) focused on
 teaching teachers alternative classroom instructional and management techniques,
 arguing that such skills were paramount in reducing school vandalism.
 A frequently cited, successful strategy involving changes in the school curriculum
 is the crime prevention program put into effect in 10 of Little Rock's (Arkansas)
 Public Schools (Gibson & Jones, 1978). This program consisted of a 15-hour
 criminal justice course curriculum and of employing specially selected crime
 prevention personnel to visit the various schools. The result was apparently dra-
 matic. In 1 year the number of burglaries decreased almost by half, though follow-
 up figures were not given.
 Duke's (1977) review reported promising results suggesting that changes in the
 curriculum affect student behavior patterns. School discipline problems may de-
 crease when the teaching of moral and affective education is offered, when skills
 for coping with specified problems are developed in the pupils, and when pupils
 are helped to understand what is important to them and what their rights and
 responsibilities are.
 The community at large. Lack of parental support and noninvolvement of the
 community at large have often been correlated with vandalism at schools (Steele,
 1978). Thus many schools encourage parent participation and seek cooperation
 278
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:10:37 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 ORIENTATIONS IN SCHOOL VANDALISM RESEARCH
 from local businesses in setting up community-oriented programs. Sometimes the
 aim is directed at vandalism at a chosen school and sometimes at reducing crime
 and violence in the entire community (Palmer, 1975).
 The liberal orientation encourages community involvement because of the
 imagined effect on the activities of the would-be vandal. Thus, extended recreational
 activities may be provided to keep children meaningfully engaged and off the street.
 Again, the school premises may be used after hours for health and social services
 to deter potential vandals. Further, school advisory councils may be established to
 plan, implement, and evaluate programs.
 Thus, the liberal rationale for community cooperation is primarily to combat
 vandalism without the punitive measures advocated by the conservative approach.
 In contrast, the radical orientation will argue that it is intrinsically wrong to permit
 a rift between school and community, and that the effect of any strategy on the
 incidence of school vandalism is therefore only of secondary importance.
 What evidence is there of the effectiveness of strategies aimed at reducing the
 opportunities for vandalistic behavior? Although school vandals are not necessarily
 violent (NIE, 1975, p. 5), it has often been found that the crime rate and the
 presence or absence of fighting gangs in the neighborhood of the school affect the
 level of violence in the school (e.g., Bayh, 1975).
 Gladstone (1978) reported one of the most thorough investigations of the peer
 group of the English school vandal. Stratified cluster samples were obtained based
 on age, religion, school access (selective or nonselective), and level of deprivation
 of the schools catchment area. The questionnaire covered issues such as use of
 leisure time, parents' attitudes, the type of groups to which boys belonged and the
 boys' attitudes toward school, and the boys' involvement in vandalism, theft, and
 aggressive behavior. The final form of the questionnaire was administered to 605
 adolescent school boys.
 Gladstone's evidence suggested that a male student was more likely to become a
 vandal when (a) there is lax parental control, (b) the pupil is a low achiever, (c) he
 dislikes school, and (d) he spends much of his free time in the company of a
 "tough" street gang. There are many difficulties involved in attempts to increase
 parental control, but new policies or new programs instigated at the school and
 aimed at these would-be vandals may be effective. For instance, Bagley (1965, cited
 in Gladstone, 1978) found that cities that spend more of their financial resources
 on leisure facilities for adolescents reported a lower incidence of delinquency.
 American research also confirmed that increasing provision for leisure leads to a
 reduction in delinquent behavior. However, Gladstone concluded,
 By and large, however, reliable evidence is extremely scarce and provides
 little basis for recommending one or another form of leisure provision as a
 remedy for vandalism. But equally the lack of evidence is no reason to dismiss
 the approach. (pp. 38-39)
 In concluding this section, we must mention again the difficulties involved in
 evaluating the effect that extracurricular activities have on the incidence of school
 vandalism. Not only is the solution very diffuse, but most studies report such a
 conglomeration of ways to involve the community that the efficacy of a specific
 279
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:10:37 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 ZWIER AND VAUGHAN
 method cannot be evaluated. (For an "action manual" detailing the collective
 measures that can be taken, see Goodman, 1975.)
 The Radical Orientation
 Vandalism is a normal reaction to debilitating conditions. The anonymity so
 characteristic of large schools and the competitiveness induced by present assess-
 ment procedures are perhaps the most obvious reasons why pupils come to dislike,
 even hate, the school system and all that it symbolizes. Such feelings of malcontent
 and aggression are generally inhibited, but now and then surface as school violence
 and vandalism of school property. The way to reduce such behavior is to note the
 symbolic meaning of the act. According to this view, it is as useless to deter, or
 catch, the individual school vandal as it is to make the cosmetic changes that the
 liberal orientation suggests. Large and impersonal schools lacking in community
 orientation must be abandoned, as must the competitive assessment system. In the
 final analysis, it is this system that is responsible for the low self-image and negative
 attitude of so many students. The radical orientation emphasizes cooperation and
 community involvement.
 The physical environment. The finding that large schools experience more van-
 dalism than small schools appears to be an accepted fact. A Canadian report
 compiled for the Ottawa Board of Education indicated that large schools are more
 likely to be vandalized (Tross, 1977; see also Rubel, 1978), while De Buzna (1975)
 showed that the number of incidents was positively related to the number of
 students enrolled in the school (De Buzna, 1975; Sturm, 1979). Yet correlational
 research does not imply causality. It may be that it is not size per se that makes the
 difference between schools that are vandalized often and schools that are not
 (Lesser, 1978, p. 402). For example, Kingston and Gentry's (1978) conclusion
 (cited by Howard, 1978), suggests that lack of student involvement may be
 responsible for much antisocial behavior. In contrast to students in smaller schools,
 those in large high schools are less likely to identify with the school or to participate
 in various school activities, leading to more frequent disciplinary problems.
 There appear to be three main strategies that will decrease the level of student
 anonymity and increase the level of student identification with the school. The first
 is the obvious one of preventing small schools from becoming larger. The second
 is to reorganize the number of enrolled students at a large secondary school into
 separate clusters, which, given time, would develop their own identity. Lesser
 (1978) reported that this strategy may indeed decrease disruption to the system.
 The third solution, often used as part of a larger program, is to somehow encourage
 a feeling of belonging. For instance, by teaching the students at the Walker-Jones
 School (Washington, D.C.) the importance of conservation and aesthetics in
 relation to their school and their community, it was hoped that the students would
 show more pride in being a Walker-Jones student. This occurred, and an increase
 in cooperative efforts at school and community was noted. There were fewer broken
 windows and a decrease in vandalism expenditure (Sabatino et al., 1978; "Taming
 Campus Vandals," 1980; "Ways of Fighting Vandalism," 1968). Rose (1977) listed
 27 specific suggestions for establishing an atmosphere that combined improved
 self-image with improved school-image.
 280
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:10:37 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 ORIENTATIONS IN SCHOOL VANDALISM RESEARCH
 The school system. Academic failure and a generalized resentment of everything
 that is related to school are often cited as factors in the incidence of school
 vandalism (Block, Covill-Servo, & Rosen, 1978; Cardinelli, 1970; Davis, 1972;
 Frease, 1973; Goldman, 1961; Lunden, 1968; Miller, 1974; Nowakowski, 1966;
 Palmore & Hammond, 1964; Stripling, 1978; Swift & Spivak, 1978; von Kronen-
 berger, 1978). As expected, academic failure is often instrumental in conditioning
 perceptions of low self-esteem among students (Gold, 1978), possibly adding to the
 negative feelings experienced through anonymity (Murillo, 1977).
 A recent study carried out under the auspices of the U.K. Home Office (Glad-
 stone, 1978) found lack of success to be associated with involvement in vandalism:
 "Those boys who saw themselves as successful at school were also much more
 likely to see themselves as good at exams, to intend to stay on at school after 16,
 and to aspire to a white-collar job" (p. 31).
 Congruent with this, changes in the curriculum and in the assessment procedures
 are suggested by Pringle (1973) and by De Buzna (1975). Pringle (1973) reported a
 positive correlation between violent and disruptive behavior on one hand, and a
 curriculum that emphasizes competition rather than individual achievement on
 the other. De Buzna (1975) showed that the incidence of school vandalism is
 inversely related to the number of alternatives the high school student has within a
 program of study. These studies propose that a curriculum with many options and
 a system of assessment that emphasizes individual achievement rather than inter-
 personal competition may help reduce the number of incidents.
 However, academic failure and a negative attitude toward school emerge as
 independently related to the incidence of vandalism. This suggests that, even if all
 students were successful in their work (an outcome requiring that alternative
 learning and assessment processes are adopted-see Barr, 1981; Gold, 1978), it
 would still not guarantee that they would regard the school in a positive light
 (Gladstone, 1978).
 The community at large. The radical orientation argues that the root of school
 vandalism is in poor interaction between school and community. A problem cannot
 be solved by strategies developed within the system that mothered the problem. Its
 source must be approached by increasing community support for, and involvement
 in, the school.
 Research to date indicates that community involvement generally, but not
 always, results in a lowered incidence of school vandalism. Studies specifically
 concerned with this issue were carried out by Daniels (1976), De Buzna (1975),
 Ellison (1975), Macri (1974), Palmer (1975), Pullen (1973), Schrock (1979), Sor-
 rentino (1975), Steele (1978), and van Voorhees, Cwik, and King (1975). (There is
 also a film showing successful student- and community-oriented strategies em-
 ployed by six American communities-see Wales, 1978.) Ellison (1975) and
 Schrock (1979) have reported a zero relationship between community involvement
 in school processes and a reduction in vandalism. The others point to a range of
 successful programs, some of which are discussed below.
 In a large survey organized by the U.S. Community Education Association, 47
 school boards indicated whether they had asked the community for help. Only
 22% replied "yes," and a great variation in the success of the strategy was reported
 (Steele, 1978).
 281
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:10:37 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 ZWIER AND VAUGHAN
 As Chair of the Senate Subcommittee to Investigate Juvenile Delinquency, Bayh
 (1978) attended numerous hearings and listened to more than 500 testimonies of
 educators, teachers, and concerned citizens. Although a number of suggestions
 were made, he was convinced "that the most important element in the prevention
 of school violence and vandalism is the active involvement of the entire education
 community in local efforts to accomplish this goal" (p. 301).
 Community support and involvement is perhaps best known through the concept
 of community education. Steele (1978) reported a nationwide survey of 1,006
 people employed by local education agencies with community education programs.
 According to Steele, community education consists of a program involving a
 director advised by a council of community residents and delegates from commu-
 nity organizations. This group would initiate research into community needs,
 develop plans to meet these needs, and, following implementation of a project,
 evaluate its effectiveness. Steele further noted that "the critical element identifying
 Community Education is the involvement in decisionmaking of citizens at the
 neighborhood level in determining needs, priorities, programs, and evaluation of
 factors affecting the quality of life in their own communities including the schools"
 (p. 85).
 Sorrentino (1975) was one of the first to report a successful community program
 carried out in the Flint School District (Michigan) over a 25-year period. The
 school district policy involved (a) obtaining the cooperation of local community
 organizations, (b) year-round recreation and enrichment programs, (c) a yearly
 distribution of a handbook describing the rights and responsibilities of students, (d)
 the employment of physical security measures, and (e) the involvement of parents
 in security affairs (see also Koch, 1975; Steele, 1978). Although an increase in
 school vandalism in that district has been noticed over the years, it has apparently
 stayed well below the national average.
 A rigorous test of the effectiveness of community involvement in schools was
 reported by Daniels (1976), who compared 30 matched pairs of community and
 noncommunity schools in Dade County, Florida. On average, he found a 60%
 lower dollar cost arising from vandalism in the community schools, both elementary
 and secondary, whether in inner city, suburban, or rural areas.
 However, not all research has shown that community involvement is effective
 (e.g., Greenberg, 1974). In a study of 18 San Francisco schools, Ellison (1975)
 noted that conversion to community schools as a solution to vandalism was
 favoured by principals whose schools were not yet converted, but was not favoured
 by those that had been converted. It seems that an essential ingredient is a prior
 phase in which residents have asked for such a program.
 The lack of efficacy of (unsolicited) community education was also reported by
 Schrock (1979) in a study in Virginia: There was no significant difference in school
 vandalism rates between community education and noncommunity education
 schools, though there was a suggestion that the former were an improvement. Steele
 (1978) expresses the probable need for commitment by the community:
 There is limited evidence to suggest that there may be less violence, vandalism
 and delinquency in some schools with programs of Community Education,
 but there is not enough information upon which to draw conclusions. If
 282
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:10:37 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 ORIENTATIONS IN SCHOOL VANDALISM RESEARCH
 community support represents students and residents in the development of
 and participation in relevant programs, it is likely that school violence and
 vandalism may be reduced. (p. 84)
 Thus there are several factors that appear to contribute to the success of this
 particular strategy: (a) school officials must really want to involve the community
 (and must not do so simply because they have been told to); (b) the community
 must want to be involved; (c) the pupil must perceive his or her own and his or
 her parents' involvement as positive. From the literature surveyed, it appears that
 programs with community involvement will work if, and only if, these three
 conditions can be met.
 Implications
 Studies of school vandalism typically ignore the ideological context within which
 both theory and research is founded. Our overview indicates that a whole range of
 strategies may be usefully employed in combating school vandalism. In the absence
 of an articulated theory, however, decisionmakers cannot do so on the basis of
 empirical evidence. Instead, they rely on intuitions and inclinations. If the vandal
 is blamed, "target-hardening" and punitive measures are employed. If the school
 system is faulted, changes are made to rectify its shortcomings. If community
 apathy is responsible, community involvement is encouraged.
 We believe that the failure of any one strategy to solve school vandalism lies in
 the nature of the system from which the phenomenon derives and in the diversity
 of approaches used to investigate it.
 We see the school as an open system within society. Innumerable variables,
 outside and inside the system, influence it. These include directives from govern-
 mental institutions; the legal system; the physical surrounding and design of the
 school buildings and grounds; the quality of the rapport among principal, teachers,
 students, and parents; the expertise of the teachers; the size of the school; the
 curriculum and specific assessment procedures in use; and the type of burglar alarm
 system in operation. It must be obvious that even if such variables could be isolated
 and their influence properly determined, their relative importance in the system
 would most likely change from school to school and from culture to culture.
 Because the result of a successful strategy may be explained with reference to the
 effect of a single variable, a group of variables, or even an interaction among several
 variables, there is no guarantee that success at one school will translate to another.
 In fact, a beneficial effect may even be explained by the "Hawthorne effect": Pupils
 will apply themselves more because they feel that teachers are beginning to show
 interest in them or because they are aware of the very act of participating in
 something new and special (Greenberg, 1974). Even studies that use a rigorous
 experimental design often omit reference to this possibility (Mayer & Butterworth,
 1981). Moreover, the usual tendency to incorporate more than one method or
 program makes it even more difficult to understand which component may have
 been successful. The complexity of the open system and the diversity of the well-
 meaning but uncontrolled strategies adopted by desperate principals and school
 committees make it impossible to generalize from the findings at any one school.
 On the other hand, more comprehensive studies that, for the sake of external
 283
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:10:37 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 ZWIER AND VAUGHAN
 validity, sample a large number of schools also have their drawbacks. The larger
 the data base, the more likely individual differences are excluded by the statistical
 process. Such results are bland. School vandalism occurs where students can ransack
 the school and get away with it; where students, teachers, and the community at
 large are apathetic; where students have come to view themselves as failures within
 the system; where schools are too large, too impersonal, or too ugly to inspire
 feelings of belonging or pride.
 This generalized picture makes sense, so much so that one imagines that the lay
 person could construct the same picture by intuition. Thus the results of large,
 multivariate studies appear to be no more than an abstraction, a modal school, not
 very often found in real communities.
 Our modal problem school also suggests its opposite, one with a good, positive,
 and constructive climate. How is this climate assessed? Is it based on expressive
 behaviors in pupils, good teacher-pupil rapport, even tidy buildings and grounds
 that are not vandalized? In other words, it is important to know whether climate
 influences vandalism, or whether (in research) it is an inference based partly on the
 relative occurrence of vandalism. Quite apart from this confusion in causality, there
 is another in a semantic and conceptual sense. Terms like climate, rapport, and
 incidence of vandalism probably overlap in the minds of many observers so that a
 good climate implies low vandalism and vice versa, by definition.
 So how can the social sciences contribute to an understanding of the causes of
 school vandalism? If it is indeed the case that (a) both its cause and the efficacy of
 any strategy employed vary from school to school, (b) extensive studies are bound
 to arrive at trite conclusions, and (c) the decision to use a given strategy is derived
 from an implicit ideology, what then should be the task of the social scientist? We
 think there are two options: (a) to continue the business of research as usual, in the
 hope that the tremendous increase in the number of projects, studies, and experi-
 ments anticipated in the next few decades will finally result in some comprehensive
 analysis of the real causes of school vandalism and of the best strategies in combating
 it; or (b) to replace this unrealistic set of expectations with an epistemological stance
 that accepts an ideological basis for school vandalism research.
 Traditionally, the researcher has sought to establish that school vandalism is
 caused by one major or several minor variables. Hypotheses are set up and tested
 for their veracity in the field. We might hypothesize that as school climate becomes
 more negative incidence of school vandalism increases. One investigator may find
 this correlation and infer that such a climate breeds vandalism. Another may report
 no relationship, leading to contradiction in the research literature, as has occurred
 in the case of Kaiser (1972) and Howell and Grahlman (1977). In a case like this,
 the usual reaction is that the evidence is ambiguous and that further research is
 needed.
 An important assumption of traditional social science research, then, is that one
 can determine whether two or more variables are related. This is how social science
 progresses-or is it progress? Despite the multitude of studies of school vandalism,
 we do not seem much closer to dealing with the problem. Its incidence has been
 correlated with numerous variables, and various strategies have been reported as
 successful. Against this, many other studies show contrary findings or report that
 the strategies do not work.
 284
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:10:37 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 ORIENTATIONS IN SCHOOL VANDALISM RESEARCH
 At this juncture, a better purpose would be served by reconceptualizing the social
 science process. If we suspend the belief that the "real world" operates independently
 of our inquiry into it, we may understand that different, even contradictory,
 explanations of a phenomenon can be true according to conditions pertaining to
 each inquiry. This is a difficult point to grasp. The traditional social science
 approach has held that some theories are true and others false and that by testing
 derivable hypotheses we can establish which theories are correct. On the other
 hand, a recent view espoused by McGuire (1980) holds that each of several
 competing theories may be defensible and that fruitful empirical tests are those
 designed to reveal the limiting conditions of each theory. This means that our
 earlier hypothesis that a negative school climate is correlated with a high incidence
 of vandalism would give way to hypotheses such as, Under what conditions is a
 negative school climate correlated with a high incidence of vandalism? and, Under
 what conditions is a negative school climate not correlated with a high incidence
 of vandalism?
 However, to admit "conditional" hypotheses leads us to consider if each school
 studied is a unique case. For the moment, we may be forced to admit this very
 point and accept that practical research is one-school-at-a-time research. To do so
 raises another problem: If we cannot transfer knowledge from one situation (school)
 to another, we cannot correlate variations in conditions with the incidence of
 school vandalism across situations. Because scientific investigation demands some
 kind of variation to establish a relationship, we must seek this within a situation.
 This implies that research can discover only which variable(s) covaries with the
 incidence of school vandalism by manipulating selected variables at a particular
 school and observing the consequences. This manoeuvre amounts to introducing
 change within the system.
 What are the practical consequences for social science research? Because we
 should only assume for now that findings are school-specific and, importantly,
 because the research exercise is inextricably bound up with the ideological orienta-
 tion of the investigator, the role of the social scientist must change. Instead of trying
 to identify "real" causes, the social scientist should monitor conditions pertaining
 to a particular system, the school, and by doing so hope to obtain knowledge of
 the system itself. The most effective way of doing this is to observe the effects of
 change introduced into the system.
 Consequently, the traditional, static approach of social science research must
 make way for a dynamic one. The alternative to research as usual involves a radical
 change of course toward action research, that is, research that is aimed at changing
 existing conditions and carried out directly by those involved. Action research
 accepts that the social scientist plays an active role in the conduct of scientific
 research. It does not regard the investigator as a passive observer whose sole intent
 is to establish real causes. Instead, it assumes that (a) researchers are themselves
 active participants in the situations researched and that the researcher-situation
 relationship deserves to be studied; (b) the framework and variables of studies
 themselves change in the course of study; and (c) an important way of testing the
 validity and significance of social knowledge is to feed data back into the setting
 researched, studying how this feedback influences further action (Torbert, 1981, p.
 437). Action research thus appreciates that the social scientist is an active participant
 285
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:10:37 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 ZWIER AND VAUGHAN
 whose task is not merely to systematize that which exists, but also to invent and
 transform that which does not exist as yet (see Moscovici, 1972).
 Although action research has not (as far as we are aware) been carried out on
 school vandalism, many examples of this new epistemology (also referred to as
 participatory, endogenous, or dialectical research with slight changes in emphasis)
 can be found in Reason and Rowan (1981). This volume shows how action research
 has been applied to a voluntary desegregation program for elementary and middle
 school classes in the United States, to a group dynamics context, to a factory
 setting, to a prison environment, to rural settings in third world countries, and to
 the Norwegian banking system. The main emphasis of these studies is on the
 benefit for the subjects of participating in the research; the research is carried out
 with them, rather than on them.
 Action research abandons the attempt to uncover an objective reality. In the case
 of school vandalism, we would start by assuming that those involved in the school
 system are primarily responsible for deciding on a course of action. To begin with,
 an action committee would need to be formed. Ideally it should consist of the
 school principal, several teacher representatives, parents, and students. Such a
 committee must be distinguished on two grounds from established PTA's, school
 committees, or community advisory councils because it involves the student as a
 decisionmaker and the social scientist as a monitor. Consider the role of each.
 From the viewpoint of the student, only a few acts of vandalism (usually arson)
 are so serious that they disrupt the educational process. Furthermore, only a
 relatively small amount of all vandalism can be attributed to individuals who are
 fundamentally antisocial. Many more vandalistic acts are committed for a specific
 reason. As we noted at the outset, the term vandalism should be reserved for acts
 that are intentional and hostility-directed. Such acts are meaningful, they commu-
 nicate a feeling or thought on the part of the vandal, and the target is often
 deliberately chosen. (As a meaningful mode of communication, school vandalism
 is hard to beat: No other means is so direct, so anonymous, or provides one with
 such instantaneous results!) A reduction in the amount of school vandalism appears
 possible only if other, more acceptable channels and modes of communication are
 adopted. By involving the student at an early point in the decisionmaking process,
 we open channels through which grievances can be expressed and acted upon.
 School vandalism is not a problem to be solved by school authorities, but is a
 breakdown in meaningful communication. Through their representatives, constit-
 uent groups can take their share of responsibility and decide together which
 strategies to follow.
 The role of the social scientist as monitor is threefold: (a) to acquire and supply
 to the group as much information as possible that is specific to the school system,
 this information serving as a baseline; (b) to report in detail on any strategy decided
 on by the group, taking particular account of the expectations and beliefs of the
 persons involved, this strategy constituting the treatment of the problem; (c) to
 provide a fully documented description of the result, which itself completes an
 analogy with the clinical situation.
 The role of the social scientist as monitor, therefore, is directed to the changes
 implemented by the action committee. The social scientist is no longer merely
 286
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:10:37 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 ORIENTATIONS IN SCHOOL VANDALISM RESEARCH
 giving an "expert opinion" on contemplated action, but is purposefully involved
 in that action, and is responsible for the analysis of its impact.
 Thus each action committee offers hypotheses for the occurrence of vandalism
 at that school. It is these tentative reasons (e.g., an authoritarian headmaster, a
 particularly vulnerable building, or a small group of ruffians) that must be trans-
 formed into appropriate action for that situation (e.g., modification of the leadership
 style, an upgrading of the building, or the development of a program that would
 occupy the boys more productively).
 Finally, we stress again that the knowledge generated by this process is specific
 to the situation in which it is acquired. The extent to which an implemented
 strategy succeeds may suggest some understanding of the probable reasons why
 vandalism occurs at the school. We hold that the "hit-and-run" studies so typical
 of social science should make way for the continuous assessment implied by action
 research. It is evident that cooperation in antivandalism strategies and, more
 generally, sustained commitment to participation in the organization of the school
 system, will greatly increase the likelihood of success in this assignment.
 References
 Arson, how to defend against the most destructive school crime. (1976, December). School
 Security, 1(4), 1-8.
 Bagley, C. (1965). Juvenile delinquency in Exeter. Urban Studies, 2, 35-39.
 Barr, R. D. (1981). Alternatives for the eighties: A second decade of development. Phi Delta
 Kappan, 62(8), 570-573.
 Bayh, B. (1975). Our nation's schools-A report card: "A" in violence and vandalism.
 Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
 Bayh, B. (1978). Seeking solutions to school violence and vandalism. Phi Delta Kappan,
 59(5), 299-302.
 Block, E. E., Covill-Servo, J., & Rosen, M. F. (1978). Failing students, failing schools: A study
 of dropouts and discipline in New York State. Rochester, NY: Statewide Youth Advocacy
 Project.
 Brenton, M. (1975). School vandalism. Today's Education, 64(2), 82; 85.
 Brooks, B. D. (1974). Contingency contracts with truants. Personnel and Guidance Journal,
 52(5), 316-320.
 Canadian Education Association. (1977, March). Vandalism. Toronto: Author. (Monograph)
 Cardinelli, C. F. (1970). Relationship of interaction of selected personality characteristics of
 school principal and custodian with sociological variables to school vandalism. Dissertation
 Abstracts International, 30, 4710A. (University Microfilms No. 70-9509)
 Citizens' Juvenile Justice Task Force Recommendations. (1981). New Jersey Educational
 Association Review, 54(7), 16-17.
 Clarke, R. V. G. (1979). Defensible space and vandalism: The lessons from some recent
 British studies. Proceedings of Conference on Urban Planning and Crime. Wiesbaden:
 Bundes-Kriminalamt.
 Clement, S. L. (1975, January). School vandalism-Causes and cures. National Association
 of Secondary School Principals Bulletin, 59(387), 17-21.
 Cohen, S. (1968, December). The politics of vandalism. New Society, 324, 872-878.
 Cohen, S. (1970). Urban school crisis: The problem and solution proposed by the Urban
 Education Task Force of HEW. Washington, DC: National School Public Relations
 Association.
 287
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:10:37 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 ZWIER AND VAUGHAN
 Cohen, S. (1971). Directions for research on adolescent group violence and vandalism. British
 Journal of Criminology, 11, 319-340.
 Cohen, S. (1973a). Campaigning against vandalism. In D. Ward (Ed.), Vandalism (pp. 215-
 257). London: Architectural Press.
 Cohen, S. (1973b). Property destruction: Motives and meanings. In D. Ward (Ed.), Vandalism
 (pp. 23-53). London: Architectural Press.
 Consortium of Local Authorities Special Programme. Vandalism and arson (Report of the
 Advisory Panel). Nottingham, UK: CLASP Development Group.
 Cramer, F. J. (1978). Some effects of school building renovation on pupil attitudes and
 behavior in selected junior high schools. Journal ofResearch and Development in Education,
 11(2), 63.
 Daniels, H. W. (1976). Vandalism: A comparative study of some of the effects of community
 education in public schools. Dissertation Abstracts International, 37, 724A. (University
 Microfilms No. 76-17, 072)
 Davis, J. E. (1972). A survey of major incidents of vandalism, causes and preventive measures
 employed in Texas public junior high schools. Dissertation Abstracts International, 32,
 4866A. (University Microfilms No. 72-10, 794)
 De Buzna, C. P. (1975). A study of school vandalism-causes and prevention measures
 currently found in selected secondary schools in cities throughout Alabama. Dissertation
 Abstracts International, 36, 627A. (University Microfilms No. 75-18, 277)
 Duke, D. L. (1977). Systematic Management Plan for School Discipline. NationalAssociation
 of Secondary School Principals Bulletin, 61(405), 1-10.
 Ellison, W. S. (1975). An analysis of the impact of community schools on the reduction of
 school vandalism in a selected district. Dissertation Abstracts International, 35, 6570A.
 (University Microfilms No. 75-679)
 Ertukel, D. (1974). School security: A student point of view. NationalAssociation of Secondary
 School Principals Bulletin, 58(384), 44-49.
 Faily, A., & Roundtree, G. A. (1979). Combating violence and vandalism in schools. National
 Association of Secondary School Principals Bulletin, 63(431), 100-104.
 Falk, N., & Coletti, R. F. (1982, February). Better vandalism protection at less cost. American
 School and University, 54(6), 52; 54.
 Fernandez, E., & Cardenas, M. (1976). Absenteeism: Is there a solution? National Association
 of Secondary School Principals Bulletin, 60, 87-91.
 Frease, D. F. (1973). Delinquency, social class and the schools. Sociology and Social Research,
 57(4), 443-459.
 Gibson, W. D., & Jones, R. B. (1978). Crime prevention in Little Rock's public schools. FBI.
 Law Enforcement Bulletin, 47(7), 12-15.
 Gladstone, F. J. (1978). Vandalism among adolescent schoolboys. In R. V. G. Clarke (Ed.),
 Tackling vandalism (Home Office Res. Study No. 47). London: Her Majesty's Stationery
 Office. (Monograph)
 Gold, M. (1978). Scholastic experiences, self esteem, and delinquent behavior: A theory for
 alternative schools. Crime and Delinquency, 24(3), 290-308.
 Goldman, N. (1959). A sociopsychological study of school vandalism. Syracuse: Syracuse
 University, New York Research Institute. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED
 002 807)
 Goldman, N. ( 1961). A sociopsychological study of school vandalism. Crime and Delinquency,
 7(3), 221-230.
 Goodman, M. E. (1975). Violence in our schools: What to know about it, what to do about it.
 Columbia, MD: National Committee for Citizens in Education.
 Grealy, J. I. (1974). Criminal activity in schools: What's being done about it? National
 Association of Secondary School Principals Bulletin, 58(382), 73-78.
 288
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:10:37 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 ORIENTATIONS IN SCHOOL VANDALISM RESEARCH
 Greenberg, B. (1974). School vandalism: Its effects and paradoxical solutions. Crime Preven-
 tion Review, 1(2), 11-18.
 Haney, S. (1973, December). School district reduces vandalism 65%. American School and
 University, 46(4), 29.
 Hathaway, J. A., & Edwards, L. F. (1972). How to (just about) vandal-proof every school in
 your district. American School Board Journal, 159(7), 27-31.
 Haydon, C. (1978, October 20). Vandals: Think tank says catch them but don't punish them
 too harshly. Times Educational Supplement, No. 3303, p. 6.
 Hevern, H. S. (1977). An analysis of the extent, costs and prevention of vandalism in Hawaii
 public secondary schools. (Doctoral dissertation, University of Southern California, 1977).
 Dissertation Abstracts International, 38, 4479A.
 Howard, J. L. (1978). Factors in school vandalism. Journal of Research and Development in
 Education, 11(2), 53-63.
 Howell, B., & Grahlman, B. (1977). School climate: Evaluation and implementation; an
 anthology. Tulsa, OK: University of Tulsa.
 Huntington, K. M. (1981). Defending elevators against vandalism. American School and
 University, 53(10), 44; 46-47.
 Irgang, A., & Gelber, L. (1981). Saving money by improving school management. National
 Association of Secondary School Principals Bulletin, 65(446), 101-108.
 Irwin, G. (1978). Planning vandalism resistant educational facilities. Journal of Research and
 Development in Education, 11(2), 42-52.
 Jacobs, E. F. (1980). Here's how Memphis cut vandalism costs in half. Executive Educator,
 2(1), 28.
 James, H. (1974, February). How secure is your classroom? Teacher, pp. 42-43.
 Juillerat, E. E. (1972, January). Fires and vandals: How to make them both unwelcome in
 your schools. American School Board Journal, 159(7), 23-26.
 Kaiser, C. J. (1972). Factors relating to vandalism in Detroit public elementary schools.
 Dissertation Abstracts International, 33, 2030A. (University Microfilms No. 72-28, 451)
 Kiernan, O. B. (1975). School violence and vandalism. Washington, DC: National Association
 of Secondary School Principals. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 106 987)
 Kingston, A. J., & Gentry, H. W. (1978). Discipline problems: Then and now. Journal of
 Research and Development in Education, 11(2), 63.
 Koch, E. L. (1975). School vandalism and strategies of social control. Urban Education,
 10(1), 54-72.
 Koff, R. H. (1979, February). The toughest game in town. National Association of Secondary
 School Principals Bulletin, 63(424), 8-18.
 Kravontka, S. J. (1974, January). Closed circuit television system design for school security.
 Security World, 11(2), 22-23; 48-49.
 Leftwich, D. F. (1978). A study of vandalism in selected public schools in Alabama.
 Dissertation Abstracts International, 39, 23A. (University Microfilms No. 78-09, 865)
 Lemert, E. M. (1967). Alcohol, values and social control. In E. M. Lemert (Ed.), Human
 deviance, social problems and social control (pp. 72-87). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
 Hall.
 Lesser, P. (1978). Social science and educational policy: The case of school violence. Urban
 Education, 12(4), 389-410.
 Liazos, A. (1978). School, alienation and delinquency. Crime and Delinquency, 24(3), 355-
 370.
 Live-in "school sitters" are saving this district thousands of dollars each year-and cutting
 vandalism as well. (1974, July). American School Board Journal, 161(7), 36-39.
 Lloyd, R. (1968). Ways of fighting vandalism. Today's Education, 57(9), 29-32.
 Lunden, W. (1968). The theory of crime prevention. In J. Stratton & R. Terry (Eds.),
 Prevention of delinquency (pp. 24-33). London: Macmillan.
 289
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:10:37 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 ZWIER AND VAUGHAN
 Macri, D. A. (1974). Community-oriented vandalism prevention. Crime Prevention Review,
 2(1), 17-23.
 Marvin, M., Connolly, I., McCann, R., Temkin, S., & Henning, P. (1976). Planning assistance
 programs to reduce school violence and disruption. Philadelphia, PA: Research for Better
 Schools.
 Mawby, R. (1977a). Defensible space: A theoretical and empirical appraisal. Urban Studies,
 14, 169-179.
 Mawby, R. (1977b). Kiosk vandalism: A Sheffield study. British Journal of Criminology, 17,
 30-46.
 Mayer, G. R., & Butterworth, T. W. (1981). Evaluating a preventative approach to reducing
 school vandalism. Phi Delta Kappan, 62(7), 498-499.
 Mayhew, P. (1979). Defensible space: The current status of a crime prevention theory. The
 Howard Journal, 18, 150-159.
 McCrosky, C. (1979). School vandalism in the United States. Dissertation Abstracts, 39,
 6407A. (University Microfilms No. 79-08, 056)
 McGuire, W. J. (1980). The development of theory in social psychology. In R. Gilmour & S.
 Duck (Eds.), The development of social psychology (pp. 53-80). London: Academic Press.
 Miller, A. J. (1974). Learning disabilities and delinquent youth. Academic Therapy, 9(6),
 389-402.
 Moscovici, S. (1972). Society and theory in social psychology. In J. Israel & H. Tajfel (Eds.),
 The context of social psychology. New York and London: Academic Press.
 Murillo, R. B. (1977). Vandalism and school attitudes. Dissertation Abstracts, 38, 3074A.
 (University Microfilms No. 77-24, 785)
 National Association for the Care and Resettlement of Offenders. (1978). Cunningham road
 improvement scheme-Impressions two years after. London: Author.
 National Institute of Education. (1975). Vandalism prevention. NAESP School Leadership
 Digest (second series). Washington, DC: Author. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service
 No. 1111 051)
 National Institute of Education. (1977). Violent schools-safe schools; the Safe School Study
 Report to the Congress (Vol. 1). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. (ERIC
 Document Reproduction Service No. ED 149 466)
 Newman, 0. (1972). Defensible space: Crime prevention through urban design. New York:
 Macmillan.
 Nowakowski, R. E. (1966). Vandals and vandalism in the schools: An analysis of vandalism
 in large school systems and a description of ninety-three vandals in Dade county schools.
 Dissertation Abstracts, 28, 437A. (University Microfilms No. 66-12, 999)
 O'Grince, S., & Hodgins, H. S. (1974). Public school vandalism: How Baltimore fights it.
 National Association of Secondary School Principals Bulletin, 58(374), 6-9.
 Olson, J. R. (1981). Curbing vandalism and theft. Educational Horizons, 59(4), 195-197.
 Pablant, P., & Baxter, J. C. (1975). Environmental correlates of school vandalism. American
 Institute of Planners Journal, 241(4), 270-279.
 Palmer, J. L. G. (1975). A study of the community education program as a deterrent of violence
 and vandalism in a small rural Michigan community. Unpublished doctoral dissertation,
 University of Michigan.
 Palmore, E. B., & Hammond, P. E. (1964). Interacting factors in juvenile delinquency.
 American Sociological Review, 29, 848-854.
 Panko, W. L. (1979). Taxonomy of school vandalism. Dissertation Abstracts International,
 40, 592A. (University Microfilms No. 79-17, 437)
 Pringle, M. K. (1973). The roots of violence and vandalism. London: National Children's
 Bureau.
 Pullen, D. (1973). Community involvement. In C. Ward (Ed.), Vandalism (pp. 295-375).
 London: Architectural Press.
 290
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:10:37 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 ORIENTATIONS IN SCHOOL VANDALISM RESEARCH
 Reason, P., & Rowan, J. (Eds.). (1981). Human inquiry, a sourcebook of new paradigm
 research. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
 Reed, R. J., & Avis, J. J. (1978). A modest strategy for reducing school conflict. National
 Association of Secondary School Principals Bulletin, 62(415), 28-36.
 Reppetto, T. A. (1974). Residential crime. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.
 Rose, C. (1977). Fight school vandalism with school pride. Teacher, 94(8), 57.
 Rubel, R. J. (1978). Assumptions underlying programs used to prevent or reduce student
 violence in secondary schools. In Theoretical perspectives on school crime (Vol. 1, chap.
 33). Washington, DC: National Institute of Education. (ERIC Document Reproduction
 Service. No. ED 157201)
 Sabatino, D. A., Heald, J. E., Rothman, S. G., & Miller, T. L. (1978). Destructive norm-
 violating school behavior among adolescents: A review of protective and preventive efforts.
 Adolescence, 13(52), 675-686.
 Sabatino, L. N. (1980, June). Electronic security works for New York. American School and
 University, 52(10), 28; 32; 34; 36.
 Schnabolk, C. (1974). Safeguarding the school against vandalism and violence. Special report:
 Planning the learning environment. Nation's Schools, 94(2), 32-36.
 Schnabolk, C. (1979). Alarm systems rarely work in school buildings. School Business Affairs,
 45(10), 12-13; 36.
 School security systems. (1974, August). Nation's Schools, 94(2), 31-36.
 Schrock, R. S. (1979). A study of the effects of community education programs on reducing
 the frequency and severity of vandalism in selected Virginia public schools. Dissertation
 Abstracts International, 39, 528A. (University Microfilms No. 79-06, 281)
 Smith, D. C. (1966). Vandalism in selected Southern California school districts: Nature,
 extent and preventive measures. Dissertation Abstracts, 27, 1236A. (University Microfilms
 No. 66-11, 589)
 Sorrentino, A. (1975). The Chicago project after 25 years. Urban Education, 10(1), 72.
 Stace, M. (1978). Vandalism and self-report studies: A review of the literature (Occasional
 Paper No. 6). Wellington, New Zealand: Institute of Criminology, Victoria University.
 (Monograph)
 Steele, M. (1978). Enrolling community support. Journal of Research and Development in
 Education, 11(2), 84-94.
 Stein, J., & Urdang, L. (Eds.). (1973). The Random House dictionary of the English language.
 New York: Random House.
 Stripling, O. W. (1978). The relationship of selected conditions to occurrences of vandalism
 in the high schools of Oklahoma City. Dissertation Abstracts, 39, 1981A. (University
 Microfilms No. 78-17, 918)
 Sturm, F. J. (1979). A study of relationships between senior high school enrollment and the
 amount of vandalism experienced by selected secondary schools. Dissertation Abstracts
 International, 40, 1202A. (University Microfilms No. 79-19, 416)
 Swift, M., & Spivak, G. (1978). Academic success and classroom behavior in secondary
 schools. Adolescence, 13(52), 686.
 Taming campus vandals. (1980). American School and University, 53(2), 44-45; 48.
 Thaw, R. F. (1980). Preventable property damage: Vandalism and beyond. In K. Baker & R.
 J. Rubel (Eds.), School crime and violence. Theoretical perspectives. Lexington, MA:
 D. C. Heath.
 Torbert, W. R. (1981). Empirical, behavioral, theoretical and attentional skills necessary for
 collaborative inquiry. In P. Reason & J. Rowan (Eds.), Human inquiry, a sourcebook of
 new paradigm research. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
 Tross, M. (1977, July). Report says large schools are more likely to be vandalized. Times
 Educational Supplement, No. 3239, p. 11.
 Vandalism: A special report. (1973, December). Nation's Schools, 31-37.
 291
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:10:37 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 ZWIER AND VAUGHAN
 van Voorhees, C., Cwik, P. J., & King, M. J. (1975). Research shows community education
 has promise. National Association of Secondary School Principals Bulletin, 59(394), 59-62.
 Vestermark, S. D., Jr., & Blauvelt, P. D. (1978). Controlling crime in schools: A complete
 security handbook for administrators. West Nyack, NY: Parker.
 Violence in the schools: Everybody has solutions. (1975). American School Board Journal,
 162(1), 27-37.
 von Kronenberger, G. R. (1978). Vandalism: A national dilemma. Journal of Research and
 Development in Education, 11(2), 63.
 Wales, D. (1978). Solutions to vandalism [Film]. Chicago: Rainbow Productions.
 Watson, B. C., & Darling-Hammond, L. (1978). Violence and vandalism in schools: Evidence
 for policy alternatives. Journal of Public Policy and Multicultural Education, 1(1), 60-69.
 Ways of fighting vandalism. (1968). Today's Education, 57(9), 29-32.
 Weeks, S. (1976). Security against vandalism. It takes facts, feelings and facilities. American
 School and University, 48(7), 37-46.
 Weiss, J. N. (1974). Vandalism: An environmental concern. NationalAssociation of Secondary
 School Principals Bulletin, 58(374), 6-9
 Wells, E. (1975). Vandalism and violence. Washington, DC: National School Public Relations
 Association.
 Westinghouse Electric. (1976, March). Crime prevention through environmental design.
 Schools demonstration plan. Arlington, VA: Author.
 Westinghouse Electric. (1978, May). Crime prevention through environmental design. Final
 report on schools demonstration. Arlington, VA: Author.
 Wilson, J. (1976). Study of vandalism in Ulster dispels popular myths. The Times Educational
 Supplement, No. 3203, p. 6.
 Wilson, S. (1978). Vandalism and "defensible space" of London housing estates. In R. V. G.
 Clarke (Ed.), Tackling vandalism (Home Office Research Study No. 47). London: HMSO.
 Wint, J. (1975, November). Contrasting solutions for school violence. Phi Delta Kappan.
 Young, G. P., & Soldatis, S. (1970). School vandalism can be stopped. American School and
 University, 42, 22-23.
 Zeisel, J. (1976). Stopping school property damage: Design and administrative guidelines to
 reduce school vandalism. Washington, DC: American Association of School Administrators.
 (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 136 447)
 Zwier, A. G., & Vaughan, G. M. (1980). School vandalism: A review of overseas research.
 Wellington, New Zealand: Department of Education. (Monograph)
 AUTHORS
 GERARD ZWIER, Research Associate, Psychology Department, University of
 Auckland, Private Bag, Auckland, New Zealand. Specializations: Social psy-
 chology of science, study of school vandalism.
 GRAHAM M. VAUGHAN, Associate Professor and Head of Department, Psy-
 chology Department, Auckland University, Private Bag, Auckland, New Zealand.
 Specialization: Social psychology.
 292
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:10:37 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms