A Survey on Causes of School Vandalism




 A Survey on Causes of
 School Vandalism
 Joseph L. Venturini
 Montclair State College
 While there exists a plethora of materials in
 the literature on methods to prevent van-
 dalism in schools, sparse coverage is afforded
 the area on causes of vandalism (Violent
 Schools, 1979; Erktukel, 1974; Shnabolk,
 1974). There does not appear to be a sys-
 tematic study or an extended discussion of
 why students vandalize schools. Most of the
 content related to causes of vandalism is
 found scattered throughout larger studies,
 and treatment is relatively limited and gen-
 eral. The causes usually cited are those of
 crime and corruption that appear to permeate
 the larger society. With youngsters sur-
 rounded by the many social disorders of the
 society, it is not unreasonable to suspect that
 this atmosphere may contribute to the vio-
 lence and vandalism found in schools. Even
 the judicial and political systems have come
 under attack as contributing factors for not
 dealing more harshly with offenders. When
 youngsters observe the lack of punishment or
 minimal punishment meted out by the courts
 to offenders, there is little to discourage them
 from committing similar acts of disruption
 and destruction.
 One other area that surfaces as a contributor
 to social problems is the family structure. Not
 only is the one-parent family a source of diffi-
 culty for youngsters, but intact families often
 fail to assume clear, strong roles in guiding,
 preparing, and encouraging children to be-
 come effective contributing members of so-
 ciety. Too often the school is force to accept
 the responsibilities of preparing youngsters
 socially and morally, when its real expertise
 and strength is in subject matter fields. When
 the socialization process from the family has
 failed, the school cannot, in most instances,
 correct this process with its current cadre of
 personnel. Discipline problems, vandalism,
 and other social dysfunctions in schools are
 usually traceable to difficulties arising out of
 family background. Most current school per-
 sonnel lack adequate training to cope with
 these problems.
 In an attempt to explore the causes of school
 vandalism, the author and a colleague went
 into the schools with a survey instrument,
 © 1982 The University of North Carolina Press
 0018-1498/82/660007-03$00.30/0
 7

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 The High School Journal- Oct/Nov 1982
 asking youngsters questions about vandalism
 problems. The instrument was a one-page
 form, asking students to respond with a "yes"
 or "no" to five sets of questions. The first
 question attempted to identify those students
 who vandalized the school by pointedly ask-
 ing if they vandalized schools. The remaining
 questions assessed home and family re-
 lations, personal feelings, the school setting,
 and the community setting. These topical
 areas were chosen from much of what the
 literature was reporting and what many
 school administrators identified from per-
 sonal interviews as causes of vandalism.
 From the over 300 responses obtained from
 middle school and high school youngsters,
 some distinct differences distinguish the stu-
 dent who vandalized schools from those who
 did not. One of the positive results of the
 study was finding that 55 percent of the stu-
 dent indicated they did not vandalize
 schools. However, it is still distressing if al-
 most one out of every two students admitted
 vandalizing schools. In terms of gender and
 school vandalism, females vandalized at
 much the same rate as males. While there was
 an attempt to assess amounts of vandalism by
 grade levels, the results were not complete.
 In discussing some of the results of the sur-
 vey, the focus will be on those individuals
 who identified themselves as vandals. Only
 those items from this group that illustrate a
 significant difference in percentages or nu-
 merical variations will be treated. While
 there has not been any scientific statistical
 treatment of the data at this time, these lim-
 ited figures should provide insight into why
 some youngsters vandalize schools.
 The category of home and family is cited in
 the literature as a possible cause of vandalism
 (Violent Schools, 1978). If the socialization
 process fails to inculcate within the child a
 respect for property or physical things, an
 attitude that promotes unnecessary des-
 truction may develop. While the majority of
 youngsters surveyed lived with their parents,
 liked their family life, could talk with their
 parents, and agreed that their parents were
 interested in their school work, some differ-
 ences were evident. Almost twice as many
 vandals indicated that they did not like their
 family life. Similarly, more than twice as
 many vandals felt they did not get enough
 freedom from home. These results indicate
 that some youngsters may attack the school to
 release frustrations that originated in the
 home.
 When students were asked questions of a
 personal nature, somewhat similar differ-
 ences appeared. More than twice as many
 vandals did not feel good about themselves,
 and 30 percent of these youngsters used drugs
 as compared with 22 percent for the non-
 vandal. In addition, the vandal worried more
 than the non-vandal, felt a need to get even
 with someone (80 percent compared to 58
 percent), and watched more violent programs
 on television (74 percent compared to 51
 percent). These figures, while not startling,
 do illustrate different behavior patterns for
 each group. The literature supports the no-
 tion that a poor self-concept could lead to
 inappropriate behavior patterns, and much
 has been written on the negative influence of
 some television programming. Drugs and al-
 cohol may be traced to irrational behaviors
 that lead to damage of property, and the need
 for money to buy drugs and alcohol may
 cause youngsters to steal and vandalize.
 Since school can be a frustrating and de-
 humanizing process for some youngsters, the
 concept of revenge seems to fulfill this need.
 Rather than lash out at an individual, young-
 sters vent their feelings on the school build-
 ing or equipment.
 The personal assessment of the individual
 section of the questionnaire appears to pro-
 vide results that support some general ideas
 related to the cause of vandalism. Youngsters
 who have poor self-concepts, who use drugs
 and alcohol, who tend to worry a lot, who feel
 a need to get even with someone, and who
 like programs of violence on television, are
 more involved in acts of school vandalism.
 The next section of the survey that had some
 significance to the causes of vandalism was
 8

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 School Vandalism
 school-related items. In categories of liking
 school, liking their teachers and principal,
 and liking courses of study, the vandals had
 percentages from 20 to 32 points lower than
 the non-vandal. They also felt that they had
 not been helped by guidance personnel and
 that their teachers were not interested in
 them. Both groups revealed similar feelings
 about their lack of input in contributing to
 school policies, and each group held positive
 attitudes toward their schoolmates.
 It would appear that the school does in-
 fluence the behavior patterns of some of its
 clientele. If school is not a "nice place" to be,
 and teachers and administrators are at odds
 with the student body, unacceptable be-
 havior may develop. These behaviors could
 lead to many dysfunctional acts by students
 toward personnel and the school building
 and equipment.
 The final category of the survey attempted to
 determine how youngsters felt about their
 communities. For the most part, almost all
 students liked their communities; however,
 more than twice as many vandals indicated a
 dislike for their community. In the area of
 after-school activities provided by the com-
 munity, approximately 60 percent in both
 groups felt the school did not provide enough
 activities. The final question assessed how
 students felt about the local police and both
 groups indicated similar results, with ap-
 proximately 50 percent suggesting the police
 were "nice guys." The results from this cate-
 gory provide little evidence that assists in
 understanding why youngsters engage in
 school vandalism. While the vandal disliked
 the community more than the non- vandal, it
 was a relatively small group of students.
 This limited survey provides data that sug-
 gest there are some basic differences in
 youngsters who vandalize schools from those
 who do not. Youngsers with family problems,
 personal problems, and school-related prob-
 lems appear more likely to vandalize schools
 than youngsters without these problems. Can
 the schools learn from these results and take
 appropriate action to reach those students
 who vandalize schools? Certainly programs
 can be developed within a reasonable time-
 frame to provide all students with a better
 school environment. Faculty and student
 groups can work together to revise curricula
 with more appropriate courses and activities.
 Workshops and meetings could be organized
 to sensitize both faculty and students to
 needs, responsibilities, and interpersonal re-
 lationships. These are initial actions that
 would lead to other more fruitful programs
 that may promote a more positive school
 climate.
 The categories of home and family would
 need to be analyzed by specialists - the
 school social worker, psychologist, and other
 related personnel - to develop programs that
 would assist families and schools in the re-
 duction of school vandalism. While this type
 of program may necessitate additional funds
 to provide a professional staff, these funds
 would probably be less than the costs of van-
 dalism. Even more important, however,
 youngsters and their families would be re-
 ceiving a much needed guidance program
 that could contribute positively to the greater
 social order.
 References
 Clements, Stanley L. "School Vandalism: Causes and
 Cures," National Association of School Principals
 Bulletin, 1975, 57(387), 17-21.
 Ertukel, Dee. "School Security: A Student Point of
 View," NASSP Bulletin, 1974, 58(384), 44-49.
 Furno, O. r. and Wallace, L. a. vandalism: Kecovery
 and Prevention," American School and University,
 1972. 44(11), 19-22.
 Schnabolk, Charles. "Safeguarding the School Against
 Vandalism and Violence," Education Digest, 1974,
 40(4), 6-9.
 Violent Schools-Safe Schools. The Safe School Study
 Report to the Congress. Vol I, Washington, D.C.:
 National Institute of Education, January, 1978.
 as
 fflffi
 9

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms