VIOLENCE AND VANDALISM IN OUR SCHOOLS

 180 JOURNAL OF THOUGHT
 EDITORIAL
 VIOLENCE AND VANDALISM IN OUR SCHOOLS
 In 1974 Senator Birch Bayh headed a committee to investigate juve-
 nile delinquency. The committee surveyed 7^7 school districts en-
 rolling approximately half of the nation' s school children. The survey
 revealed that over 100 students were murdered on school grounds in
 1973, and vandalism ran over S00 million dollars. Recent NEA Teacher
 Opinion Polls indicate ^0, 000 to 60, 000 teachers are physically as-
 saulted every school year. 2 Although recognizing the gravity of the
 situation professional educators disagree on the best approach to
 reducing the scope of the problem. For example, the November issue
 of Phi Delta Kappa presented two ends of a continuum in responding
 to the violence and vandalism in our schools. Joseph Wint advocated
 the side of law and order emphasizing discipline and reported that
 this led to increased SAT scores and an end to violence at Wyandanch
 High School in Long Island. ^ Dennis Van Avery stressed a humanitarian
 approach to permit growth of trust, caring, feeling and sharing. 4
 He reported promising results. The problem of destruction and vio-
 lence is pressing. It requires educators best efforts at analysis.
 This study will explore two facets of the problem and suggest a
 tentative response to the growing problem of violence and vandalism.
 First, responsibility as a dimension of both autonomy and maturity
 will be explored. Second, emerging attention to and concern for
 solipsism will be analyzed. Third, there will be a tentative response
 to alleviate the increasingly destructive action of students.
 The act of vandalism or violence is assumed to be willful or mali-
 cious destruction of public or private property. The intent is to de-
 face or destroy. The issue is by no means new to our time. Marcus
 Aurelius noted that men suffer from one another, and perhaps the
 largest part of human suffering comes to man from those who he
 calls his brothers. He further indicated that every man should live
 in such a way as to discharge his duty and to trouble himself about
 nothing else. 5 The Classical- Christian tradition focused on respon-
 sibility, duty, and authority as the bedrock of certainty for social
 order. Administrative theorists have long used the Weberian model
 of Theory X as a symbol of traditional lines of authority and respon-
 sibility, with focus not on freedom but on uniformity of organiza-
 tional purpose. All these responses to human behavior were designed
 to protect and preserve the existing order. In the last decade there
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:25:33 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 JOURNAL OF THOUGHT 181
 has been a generalized revolt against authority and tradition, that
 Robert Nisbet feels is as great as any since the Roman Empire. 6
 Societies throughout history have sought to balance freedom and
 authority; rights and responsibility; immediacy and continuity with
 the weight of evidence on the side of external constraint providing
 parameters for individual acts. Fascism, Communism, Nazism, were
 forms of monism seeking to provide social order, not individual free-
 dom, as an answer to the age-old dilemma of rights and responsibili-
 ties. Western democracies were in a sense a social democratic ex-
 periment focusing on individual freedoms in choice and decision making.
 Educational systems in democracies sought to balance individual rights
 and responsibilities. A view of the nature of man which entailed a
 positive and optimistic expectation that individuals would and could
 perceive consequences of actions for the social good and act accord-
 ingly. Part of Western Democratic belief in such a potential for
 man can rightly be laid at the door of a religious tradition. The po-
 tential and possibility of individual acts done in line with regard for
 consequences is deeply embedded in faith.
 Admittedly, the unity of freedom and order, which lies hidden
 in the depths of the divine, remains impenetrable for the
 patchwork of our knowledge. We must be content to contem-
 plate the growth of freedom out of subordination - a fulfill-
 ment ultimately incomprehensible, yet still actualized from
 time to time . ^
 Man's unique capacity to communicate, to utilize hands and feet
 directed by a potentially rational mind never assures that these unique
 gifts cannot become weapons of destruction. Thus, the rise and fall
 of civilizations.
 Thomas Jefferson saw schools as the route to an enlightened and
 responsible citizenry to protect the republic from ignorance under
 whatever banner it operates.
 Whereas . . . experience hath shown, that . . . those en-
 trusted with power have, in time, and by slow operations,
 pre ver ted it into tyranny; and it is believed that the most
 effectual means of preventing this, would be to illuminate,
 as far as practicable, the minds of the people at large. ...
 This statement is an article of faith in the role and function of
 schools to protect and preserve an open society. He further notes
 the limits of freedom.
 The rights of conscience we never submitted, we could not
 submit. We are answerable for them to our God. The legitiThis
content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:25:33 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 182 JOURNAL OF THOUGHT
 mate powers of government extend to such acts only as are
 injurious to others. 9
 School authority represented by administrators and teachers was
 viewed historically as an obligation and duty to use whatever power
 available to minimize willful and malicious destruction and maximize
 responsible action. Vandals by their acts reject the authority repre-
 sented in and by the school. If this rejection rests in part on the be-
 lief that schools are not based on popular mandate, Slote notes: (1)
 Egalitarian ideas about institutional organization can be profoundly
 destructive when applied to higher education. Democracy does not
 require hostility to all forms of authority not resting on a popular
 mandate. (2) The student is or ought to be in a position of seeking
 to acquire some definable species of intellectual or practical compe-
 tence through an organized course of instruction. (3) On completion
 of this instruction the students' achievement is certified by those
 who have supervised him through the school. (4) Students enter into
 an implicit contract with faculty and administration authorizing them
 to apply various kinds of pressures to encourage individual growth.
 (5) There is an implicit contract like that in the field of patient-
 doctor relation. In medicine self-determination involves the right
 to decide whether to seek medical care at all and if so to decide what
 kind of care to seek and from whom. It cannot involve the right to
 decide how a doctor is to treat a case since he was sought for com-
 petency the patient did not have. 10 Thus, school authorities are to
 represent a balance between freedom and order and to preserve con-
 servative functions of the school. One might argue that compulsory
 education takes away the student's right to choose not to attend
 school and thus vandalism is a rejection of forced schooling. Com-
 pulsory education implies a social contract between student and the
 society. It is not to be viewed as a threat but as an opportunity pro-
 vided at public expense for future participating citizens to gain a
 larger parameter of elevating vision. As Jefferson noted, the twin
 evil of bigotry and persecution could be avoided in the United States
 by a vigorous policy of enlightenment. "To penetrate and dissipate
 these clouds of darkness, the general mind must be strengthened by
 education. Thus, public education is a gift of a society to its
 youth .
 Vandalism implies a lack of purpose and an unwillingness to take
 responsibility for participation in society's best efforts to provide
 an enlightened citizenry. Individual responsibility for an act involves
 recognition of the consequences of that act on, toward, and for soThis
content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:25:33 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 JOURNAL OF THOUGHT 183
 ciety. Recognition of consequences of an action infers autonomy and
 maturity. The autonomy of an individual is reflected in the ability
 to gain a sense of "ontological self -direction" which is the basis for
 developing a sense of human totality. It is this self-direction that
 provides an individual with the moral strength to act responsibly
 whether or not there is an authority figure in the school building.
 Acts of vandalism far too often reflect a dichotomy between respon-
 sibility for a given act and responsibility to others for that act. The
 vandal reflects a crisis in attitudes toward human beings, towards
 what we are, and to the facilities that represent social gifts to
 youths. The act of vandalism for whatever intent or lack of intent
 is a symbol of social decay, conflicting values, aimlessness and a
 protest against a system. A first response to vandalism is the de-
 velopment of ásense of responsibility for individual acts. A religious
 sense of ontological self direction provides a base for autonomy and
 maturity in analyzing social consequences of action. A key perhaps
 that might be found in a religious sense is ásense of purpose inhuman
 existence. Such purpose might well provide a bridge between the
 various stages of development set forth by Piaget and Kohlberg. The
 bridge could provide the transition from moral heteronomy to moral
 autonomy. ^
 A pragmatic sense of self direction entailing disciplined action in
 light of consequences of a given act was noted by Dewey. Dewey was
 careful to seek combining effective release of intelligence with per-
 sonal experience in the democratic way of living.
 I have done so purposely because democracy is so often and so
 naturally associated in our minds with freedom of action, for-
 getting the importance of freed intelligence which is necessary
 to direct and to warrant freedom of action. Unless freedom
 of individual action has intelligence and informed conviction
 back of it, its manifestation is almost sure to result in con-
 fusion and disorder. The democratic idea of freedom is not
 the right of each individual to do as he pleases, even if it be
 qualified by adding "provided he does not interfere with the
 same freedom on the part of others.
 The concept of moral autonomy is inherent in process of growth
 through disciplined inquiry in light of individuals attention to the
 quality of experience. Such focus on quality underlines skill, ability
 and capacity to balance freedom and authority. Vandalism might well
 be the result of what Dewey referred to as the "lost individual", or
 one who has lost loyalties which once held individuals by giving them
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:25:33 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 184 JOURNAL OF THOUGHT
 support, direction and unity of outlook on life. ^ Whether this loyalty
 is found through a religious sense or a common faith in the potential
 for individuals to act responsibly, the role of school authority whether
 reflected by administrator or teacher, is to channel individual search
 toward moral autonomy and maturity. No one blends religious sense
 and common faith better than Whitehead:
 What I am now insisting is that the principle of progress is
 from within; the discovery is made by ourselves, the disci-
 pline is self -discipline, and the fruition is the outcome of our
 own initiative. . . . The ultimate motive power, alike in
 science, in morality, and in religion, is the sense of value,
 the sense of importance. It takes the various forms of won-
 der, of curiosity, of reverence, or worship, of tumultuous
 desire for merging personality in something beyond itself. 16
 Thus,* is set the route for emerging out of immediacy and into a
 sense of meaning, purpose and value in human existence.
 Current emphasis on value clarification games focus on self esteem,
 empathy, warmth, rapport, communication, self exploration and
 analysis. These concerns are important in developing affective do-
 main learnings and understandings. Yet, the danger lies in a sense of
 overemphasis, overfocus, on self rather than on others. Passionate
 intensity of the moment, immediacy, feeling, self gratification - all
 work to the detriment of a sense of responsibility for the other in
 space and time. There tends to be a lack of awareness to the long-
 term consequences of a given act. A rock thrown through a window
 is a destructive, violent act based on immediate gratification, not
 on the longterm consequences. An integrative, holistic concept of
 response and participation is lacking. There is lack of understanding
 of the role of the individual as a model maker through and in his human
 participation. 17 There is further a lack of perception of man as a
 "world -shaper. "1® The challenge of solipsism is its sense of aliena-
 tion, isolation and separation of act and consequence. Acts of van-
 dalism are not separated from consequences. Such acts result in
 increased social burdens whether through more restrictive agents or
 increased forms of security. No man is an island. We cannot act in
 isolation and without social consequences. Nor can duty or responsi-
 bility be separated from freedom and rights. They are interrelated
 terms. A student has a right to attend schools which have not been
 vandalized. A teacher has a right to work in a classroom which has
 not been vandalized. Thus, vandals take away the rights of others.
 The balance between rights and responsibilities requires a careful
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:25:33 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 JOURNAL OF THOUGHT I85
 analysis of the danger of excesses of solipsism. Social orders may
 be endangered with a wave of immediacy disrespecting rights of
 others and failing to understand the consequences of acts.
 Perhaps part of the problem of overemphasis on self and immediacy
 grows out of current acceptance of a narrow focus of humanism.
 Maslow for example refers to the good life of the self-actualizing
 person. He notes self -actualizing people are gratified sufficiently
 in all their needs. Maslow speaks of forces within the individual as
 found in sentences such as I need to . . . "This we may call 'inner
 requiredness1 and it is felt as a kind of self-indulgence rather than
 as a duty.""^ Carl Rogers refers to valuing in the mature person as
 openness of the individual to experiences within himself .20 The con-
 cept of ontological self-discipline is not always clear in such state-
 ments. The commitments of religious and philosophical ought are
 missing. This is not to deny the importance of self analysis, explora-
 tion and satisfaction, but to suggest overemphasis and focus on needs
 and underemphasis on duty neglects the reciprocal relationships be-
 tween authority and justice; freedom and control necessary to any
 society. It is the main business of the family and the school, Dewey
 notes, to influence directly the formation and growth of attitudes
 and dispositions emotional, intellectual and moral. 21 This is a call
 to disciplined action in light of social consequences therefrom. Sidney
 Hook finds of skepticism and indifference toward lawful acts:
 To be law abiding in some circles is to be "a square". . . .
 Therefore, our goal must now be to build up and strengthen
 a mood of respect for the law, for civil obedience to laws. . .
 To have the positive law on the side of right and justice is to
 have a powerful weapon that makes for voluntary compli-
 ance. . . . 22
 Democratic societies require sharing, consensus and respect for
 self and other. Willful and malicious destruction of public school
 property requires rethinking theories of individualism to develop new
 coping strategies. If such rethinking requires us to look to religious
 commitments and common faith in disciplined inquiry of history, we
 should not tarry of fear of being called traditionalists. Stressing
 balance between the dimensions of actions in light of requirements
 for organized society merely reflects reciprocity between freedom
 and justice. Order in action reflects to a degree order in thought.
 Ontological self-direction and purpose enables individual and social
 stability, continuity and disciplined change. As C.I. Lewis notes:
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:25:33 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 186 JOURNAL OF THOUGHT
 The mind will always be capable of discovering that order
 which is a requisite to knowledge, because a mind such as
 ours, set down in any chaos tkat can be conjured up, would
 proceed to elicit significance by abstraction, analysis and
 organization, to introduce order by conceptual classification
 and categorical delimitation of the real, and would through
 learning from accumulated experience, anticipate the future
 in ways which increasingly satisfy its practical intent. 23
 There are no easy answers to vandalism. However, tentative pro-
 visional suggestions to lessen if not eliminate the most glaring, costly
 abuses will be attempted. Increased participation in decision making
 processes where feasible and possible would gain ásense of belonging
 and purpose among students. Specific educational aims in operation
 demonstrate how specific schools have dealt with vandalism. Sunny-
 vale Schoól District in California initiated a number of community
 projects which led to a sense of belonging to a group with a purpose,
 a sense of identity and responsibility. In time a total community
 approach to engaging youth in a variety of activities from field trips,
 dancing, recreational activities, gardening and landscape clean up
 projects developed ásense of autonomy and ontological self discipline
 which greatly reduced school vandalism. Students were engaged in
 planning activities during and after school both in respect to their
 own projects and in respect to student- faculty-administration deci-
 sions. 24 As Dewey noted, "Absence of participation tends to produce
 lack of interest and concern on the part of those shut out. "2^ Stu-
 dents and teachers should have the opportunity to participate in the
 formation of aims, methods of materials, even rules of the school
 of which he is a part. 26 Dewey reinforced his belief in the positive
 effects of participation in decisionmaking by noting "habitual exclu-
 sion has the effect of reducing a sense of responsibility for what is
 done and its consequences. "27
 The delicate and difficult task of developing character and
 good judgment in the young needs every stimulus and inspira-
 tion possible. It is impossible that the work should not be
 better done when teachers have that understanding of what
 they are doing that comes from having shared in forming its
 guiding ideas. 28
 The administrative role in maintaining an organizational climate
 conducive to positive discipline inquiry and maturity in care for school
 facilities is clearly pointed out by Dewey:
 The administrator will conceive adult education to be a necesThis
content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:25:33 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 JOURNAL OF THOUGHT 187
 sary part of his job ... in the sense that only as the public
 is brought to understand the needs and possibilities of the
 creative education of the young, can such education be vitally
 effective. He will realize that public education is essentially
 education of the public; directly, through teachers and stu-
 dents in the school; indirectly, through communicating to
 others his own ideals and standards, inspiring others with the
 enthusiasm of himself and his staff for the function of in-
 telligence in the transformation of society. 29
 The function of intelligence refers to self direction, autonomy and
 standards of conduct generally accepted by the social order. Thus,
 quality of action is viewed in terms of social consequences of these
 acts. In 1931, John Dewey noted that thinking takes place in a scale
 of degrees of distance from the urgencies of an immediate situation
 in which something has to be done.^O
 He further noted that the first, if most limited consideration, is
 the range and vitality of the experience of the thinker himself, that
 is, his most direct personal experience . . . which may be personal,
 curtailed, one-sided, distorted. The remedy, however, is not isola-
 tion, alienation from society but rather increased acquaintance with
 the experience of others both contemporary and historical Surely,
 this is a route to assisting in decreasing if not eliminating the under-
 lying causes of vandalism under whatever banner it flies. As youth
 are brought into varied activities in decision making and projects in-
 volvement with others, they will gain not only a sense of personal
 worth and value but of self, directed, purposeful discipline. Such
 involvement will eliminate or lessen frustration, alienation, isola-
 tion, and a lack of relationship with institutional purposes.
 We have explored responsibility and solipsism with a provisional
 analysis of educational aims that might respond to the underlying
 causes of vandalism. In conclusion, Dewey in Human Nature and Con-
 duct relates the primary themes of this paper:
 Liability is the beginning of responsibility. We are held ac-
 countable by others for the consequences of our acts. They
 visit their like and dislike of these consequences upon us. In
 vain do we claim that these are not ours; that they are pro-
 ducts of ignorance not design, or are incidents in the execu-
 tion of a most laudable scheme. Their authorship is imputed
 to us. We are disapproved, and disapproval is not an inner
 state of mind but a most definite act. Others say to us by
 their deeds we do not care a fig whether you did this deliberThis
content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:25:33 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 188 JOURNAL OF THOUGHT
 ately or not. We intend that you shall deliberate before you
 do it again, and that if possible your deliberation shall pre-
 vent a repetition of this act we object to. . . . The individual
 is held accountable for what he has done in order that he may
 be responsive in what he is going to do. Gradually persons
 learn by dramatic imitation to hold themselves accountable,
 and liability becomes a voluntary deliberate acknowledgement
 that deeds are our own, that their consequences come from
 us. 32
 REFERENCES
 ■'■Willard McGuire, "What Can We Do About Violence?" Today's
 Educatioň, Vol. 64, No. 4 (November-December, 197^), 22.
 2 Ibid.
 ^ Joseph Wint, "The Crackdown, " Phi Delta Kappan, November,
 197s, pp. 175-176.
 ^Dennis Van Avery, "The Humanitarian Approach, " Phi Delta
 Kappan, November, 1975, pp. 177-178.
 ^George Long, Translator, The Meditations of the Emperor Mar-
 cus Aurelius Antoninus (New York: Burt Company), pp. 54, 67.
 ^Robert Nisbet, "The Nemesis of Authority, " Intercollegiate
 Review, n.d., pp. 3-4.
 ^Helmut Kuhn, "The Case For Order in a Disordered Age, " in
 Paul G. Kuntz, Editor, The Concept of Order (Seattle: University of
 Washington Press, 1968), pp. 458-459.
 ^Saul K. Padover, editor, Thomas Jefferson (New York: New
 American Library, 19^2), p. 42.
 ^Ibid., p. 4.
 l°Michael A. Stote, "Desert, Consent and Justice, " Philosophy
 and Public Affairs, Vol. 2, No. 4 (Summer, 1973), 405-406, 388-389,
 393.
 -^Padover, op. cit. , pp. 168-169.
 ■^William Horosz, The Crisis of Responsibility (Norman: Univer-
 sity of Oklahoma Press, 1975), PP- 314-321.
 13 Ibid., p. 313.
 John Dewey, Problems of Men (Ames, Iowa: Little field and
 Adams, 19s8), p. 61.
 Ie» John Dewey, Individualism Old and New (New York: Capricorn
 Books, 1929), p.- 52.
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:25:33 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 JOURNAL OF THOUGHT 189
 ^Alfred North Whitehead, The Aims of Education (New York: The
 New American Library, 1929), p. 49.
 l^Horosz, °P« cit., pp. 312-313.
 ■^Ibid., p. 456.
 ^A.H. Maslow, "The Bond Life of the Self-Actualizing Person, "
 Paul Kurtz, editor, Moral Problems in Contemporary Society (Engle-
 wood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1969), pp. 67, 69.
 2^Carl Rogers, "Toward a Modern Approach to Values, " in Paul
 Kurtz, Moral Problems in Contemporary Society, p. 90.
 21-Dewey, Problems of Man, p. 62.
 ^Sidney Hook, "Social Protest and Civil Disobedience, " in Moral
 Problems in Contemporary Society, pp. 171-172.
 ^c.I. Lewis, Mind and the World Order (New York: Dover Publi-
 cations, 1929), p. 39.
 24john s. Gee, "Community Schools: Sunnyvale Action Against
 Delinquency, " Crime Prevention Review, Vol. 1, No. 46 (July, 1974),
 30.
 ^Dewey, Problems of Man, p. 62.
 26lbid., p. 63.
 2?Ibid., p. 65.
 28Ibid.
 29lbid., p. 61.
 30john Dewey, "Context and Thought, " University of California
 Publications in Philosophy, Vol. 12, No. 3, p. 219.
 3*Ibid., p. 223.
 3 2 John Dewey, Human Nature and Conduct (New York: The Modem
 Library, 1922), p. 31s.
 Editor's Note:
 Contributors to the Journal are encouraged to adhere to general
 style and format of articles published, as well as to carefully
 proof read for errors.
This content downloaded from 128.95.104.66 on Thu, 20 Apr 2017 19:25:33 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms