ES AND THEIR VICTIMS: UNDERSTANDING A PERVASIVE PROBLEM IN THE SCHOOLS
George M. Batsche & Howard M. Knoff (1994)
School Psychology Review, 23, 165 – 175.

Abstract: School violence traditionally has been defined in terms of acts of assault, theft, and vandalism. However, a lesser but more frequent form of violence "bullying," affects 15% to 20% of all students in schools today. The National Education Goals Panel has identified creating school environments that are free from violence as one of the national goals. This goal cannot be achieved unless the issue of bullying is addressed directly by school systems in the United States. This article discusses the characteristics of bullies and their victims, school and family factors that affect the development of the bully/victim experience, and the school system responses to bullying. Finally, components of a comprehensive intervention plan for bullying are provided. 

In response to the increasing concern over the issue of school safety, the National Education Goals Panel (1993) included as one of the six national education goals, "by the year 2000, every school in America will be free of drugs and violence and will offer a disciplined environment conducive to learning." School violence traditionally has been defined as acts of assault, theft, and vandalism. The definition of school violence has been limited to these behaviors because they are readily observable, generally reported, and easy to document. In addition, boards of education throughout the United States can develop policies (Codes of Conduct) and implement consequences (suspension/expulsion) more easily (and defensibly) when the definition is limited to observable and measurable offenses. Violence, however, should be defined more broadly to include any conditions or acts that create a climate in which individual students and teachers feel fear or intimidation in addition to being the victims of assault, theft, or vandalism. This latter description would include "bullying" in the definition of violence and greatly expand the discussion of violence and safety in the schools (Furlong & Morrison, this issue). 
"Bullying" is defined as a form of aggression in which one or more students physically and/or psychologically (and more recently, sexually) harass another student repeatedly over a period of time. Typically, the action is unprovoked and the bully is perceived as stronger than the victim (Hazier, Hoover, & Oliver, 1992; Olweus, 1991a). The purpose of this article is to: (a) present information on the incidence of bullying; (b) discuss the characteristics of bullies and their victims; (c) identify school and family factors related to bullying; (d) discuss the schools' response to bullying; and (e) present possible intervention programs designed to improve the coping skills of students who are victims as well as to reduce the rate of aggression in bullies. 
INCIDENCE AND TRENDS
The majority of research on bullying has been conducted in Scandinavian countries (Olweus, 1973, 1978, 1984, 1991a, l991b), England (Boulton & Underwood, 1992; Stephenson & Smith, 1989) and Japan (Murakami, 1985). Although relatively little attention has been given to bullying in the United States, some studies have addressed the problem (Hazier, Hoover, & Oliver, 1992; Hoover, Oliver, & Hazler, 1992; Perry, Kusel, & Perry, 1988; Perry, Williard, & Perry, 1990). Olweus (1991a, 1978) reported that about 15% of Norwegian school students were involved in bully/victim problems "now and then." In two separate studies involving elementary and secondary students in England, Stephenson and Smith (1989) and Lane (1989) reported that approximately 23% of children and adolescents experienced bullying. 
Similar results have been obtained in the United States. In a 1984 study by the National Association of Secondary School Principals, it was reported that 25% of students surveyed stated that one of their most serious concerns was "fear of bullies." Perry, Kusel, and Perry (1988) reported that about 10% of their sample of American students could be characterized as "extreme victims" of bullying. However, Hoover, Oliver, and Hazler (1992) reported that approximately 75% of the adolescent students participating in their study answered "yes" to the question, "have you ever been bullied during your school years?" This statistic would overrepresent the problem of bullying when the criterion of "repeated" incidence (see definition of bullying earlier in this article) is applied. In a special report for the National Education Goals Panel, Johnston, O'Malley, and Bachman (1993) of the University of Michigan's Institute for Social Research reported that 29% of 8th graders were threatened without a weapon and 19% were threatened with a weapon at school during the 1992 school year. Clearly, a great deal of similarity exists across students and countries in the percentages of students reporting experiences with bullying. A statement that 15% to 20% of all students will experience some form of bullying during their school years is certainly supported by the literature. Therefore, bullying may be the most prevalent form of violence in the schools and the form that is likely to affect the greatest number of students. 
Is student victimization increasing? Olweus (199lb) suggests that bullying takes on more serious forms and occurs more frequently than it did 10 to 15 years ago in Norway. Johnston, O'Malley, and Bachman (1993) report an increase, from 19% in 1980 to 25% in 1992, in the percentage of 12th graders in the United States threatened without a weapon. The majority of the increase took place between 1980 and 1985 and the figures have remained quite stable during the past 7 years. Whether or not there is an increase in student victimization, the fact that one in five students is at-risk for victimization is cause for serious concern and action on the part of school personnel. 
Victimization by students is not limited to other students. Johnston, O'Malley and Bachman (1993) reported that 28% of public school teachers were verbally abused, 15% threatened with injury, and 3% physically attacked by students during the 1991 school year. Although teachers (and parents, for that matter) may not fit the "physically weaker" profile of the typical peer victim, bullies nonetheless will intimidate those who they believe can not, or will not, retaliate or those with whom they have been successful in bullying in the past. As will be seen later in this article, many bullies come from environments where they have been successful in bullying adults for personal gain, to establish a positive reputation with their peers, or to escape an undesirable situation. 
CHARACTERISTICS OF BULLIES AND VICTIMS
Development of a Bully 
Evidence suggests that bullying is "intergenerational" and that a bully at school is a victim at home (Floyd, 1985; Greenbaum, 1988). Bullies come from homes where parents: (a) prefer physical means of discipline (authoritarian); (b) are sometimes hostile and rejecting; (c) are described as both hostile and permissive (inconsistent parenting/little supervision); (d) have poor problem-solving skills; and (e) teach their children to strike back at the least provocation (Floyd, 1985; Greenbaum, 1988; Loeber & Dishion, 1984). Olweus (1991a) reports that bullies are often characterized by impulsivity, a strong need to dominate others, and have little empathy with victims. However, he found no indications that bullies are anxious, insecure, or lack self-esteem. Perhaps this is the case because bullies report that they "like" being a bully and perceive their actions as justified (Greenbaum,1988). They are reinforced for their actions through both positive reinforcement (goal attainment) and negative reinforcement (removal of threat) paradigms. Bullying is all about control. When they are in control bullies feel more secure and less anxious. Unfortunately, that security is at the expense of their victims. In general, bullies can be described as having aggressive behavior profiles combined with physical strength (Olweus, 1991b). Aggressive boys are confident of achieving success through their aggression, are unaffected by the possibility of inflicting pain and suffering, and process information about victims in a rigid and automatic fashion (Perry, Kusel, & Perry, 1988). Bullies believe that they pick on their victim because they are provoked or because they do not like the victim. When asked how they feel when they bullied other children, the most common responses were that they felt good/happy or that they felt mad or angry (Boulton & Underwood, 1992). 
Follow-up studies of bullies do not paint a positive picture. Olweus (1991) reported that approximately 60% of boys identified as bullies in Grades 6-9 had at least one conviction at the age of 24 and that 35% to 40% had three or more convictions. This was true of only 10% of the control group. By comparison, Olweus also noted that former victims had an average of below average level of criminality in early adulthood. Eron, Huesmann, Dubow, Romanoff, and Yarnel (1987), in a sample of students in the United States, reported that bullies identified early in school had a one-in-four chance of having a criminal record by age 30. Olweus (1991a) also noted that former victims had an average or below average level of criminality in early adulthood. 
Victims 
Olweus (1973, 1978) identified two types of victims: the passive victim and the provocative victim. Passive victims are described as anxious, insecure, appearing to do nothing to provoke attacks, and appearing not to defend themselves. Provocative victims are described as hot-tempered, restless, and anxious, and ones who will attempt to retaliate when attacked. Perry et al. (1988) identified victims in a similar manner, using the terms "high-aggressive" and "low-aggressive victims." However, Perry et al. (1988) found that the probability of a victim being provocative or passive was approximately equal whereas Olweus (1984) reported fewer than one in five victims as provocative. 
Olweus describes the passive victim as lonely and abandoned at school, often without friends. They are not aggressive, do not tease, and are likely (if boys) to be physically weaker than same-age peers. Results of parent interviews suggest that these boys were sensitive at a young age and have closer contact and more positive relations with their parents (particularly their mothers) than boys in general. Teachers identify these children as overprotected by parents. The majority of victims believe that they are picked on because they are smaller, weaker, or for no reason at all (Boulton & Underwood, 1992). Few believe that they provoked the bully. In addition, the vast majority of victims believe that bullies feel good, happy, brilliant, or clever when they pick on a victim. 
Perry et al. (1988) have investigated the relationship between victimization, aggression, and peer rejection. They found aggression and victimization were orthogonal dimensions. That is, some of the most extreme victims also were some of the most aggressive children in their sample. Perry and colleagues (1988) suggest that victims constitute a heterogeneous group and can be categorized in the following manner: victimized/rejected, aggressive/ rejected, and victimized/aggressive/rejected. The victimized/rejected child would reflect Olweus' "passive victim" profile while the victimized/aggressive/ rejected would reflect the "provocative victim" profile. As Perry et al. (1988) suggest, the victimized/aggressive/rejected student might aggress against weaker children but then be victimized by stronger, aggressive peers. This would explain the fact that some of the most extreme victims in their sample also were some of the most aggressive students. 
Clearly, it is necessary to understand the type of victim one is working with in order to implement successful interventions. If one views all victims as passive and weak, then strategies such as assertiveness training and presenting a stronger visual profile might be recommended. However, the provocative victims would require strategies designed to reduce aggressive behaviors (e.g., interpreting hostile bias) as well as strategies to use more assertive/less aggressive solutions to threats (Dodge, Coie, Pettit, & Price, 1990). These highly aggressive/ victimized students are among the most disliked members of the peer groups and are at risk for later adjustment problems. Perry and colleagues (1988) caution that the form and seriousness of the problems associated with peer rejection may depend on the ability of school personnel to accurately identify the type of rejection that the student is experiencing. 
Victimization is generally unrelated to most physical characteristics of children. In two separate studies, Olweus (1973, 1978) demonstrated that the only physical characteristic related to victimization was physical strength. No other physical characteristics were associated with victim status. Weaker children were more likely to be victims and bullies were more likely to be physically stronger (than their victims). Students who are fat, red-haired, wear glasses, speak in an unusual dialect, dress differently and the like were no more likely to be victims than other students without these characteristics. 
Gender Differences 
The general trend is for boys both to bully and be bullied more than girls. Victims report that about 65% of bullying is perpetrated by boys, 15% by girls, and 19% by boys and girls (Boulton & Underwood, 1992). In a recent Olweus (1991a) study, more than 60% of girls bullied in grades 5-7 were bullied by boys only and an additional 15 to 20% were bullied by both boys and girls. More than 80% of victimized boys are bullied by boys. The type of bullying varies according to gender as well. Boy bullies are three to four times more likely to inflict physical assaults than girl bullies (Eron, Huesmann, Dubow, Romanoff, & Yamel, 1987), whereas girls use more ridicule and teasing (Hoover, Oliver, & Hazler, 1992). Olweus has labeled open attacks as direct bullying and social isolation and exclusion from the group as indirect bullying. Boys are more likely to employ direct bullying. 
SCHOOL FACTORS AND THE EFFECTS OF BULLYING
School Variables 
Researchers in England and Scandinavian countries have investigated the relationship between rate of bullying and school size, class size, ethnic mix, and socioeconomic levels. Results of these studies indicate that no positive relationship exists between the relative frequency or level of bully/victim problems and the size of the school or the size of the class (Olweus, 1991a; Whitney & Smith, 1993). The size of the schools ranged from 100 to 1,200 students and the class size from 18 to 31 students. In addition, there is no relationship between the proportion of white/nonwhite students and the frequency of bullying behavior (Whitney & Smith, 1993). Whitney and Smith (1993) reported a significant negative correlation between socioeconomic status of the families that the school serves and the frequency of bullying in junior/middle schools. To date, no studies report similar comparisons for schools in the United States. However, the average school size, class size, and percent of students by ethnic group in the Whitney and Smith study were very similar to that of schools in the United States. 
Age/Grade Trends 
The percentage of students bullied decreases significantly with age and grade. The rate of decline is less during junior high and high school. Olweus (1991) reports that the average percentage of students bullied was 11.6% in grades 2 through 6 and 5.4% in grades 7 through 9. More than 50% of students in the lowest grades were bullied by older students whereas older children are bullied primarily by same-age peers (Boulton & Underwood, 1992; Olweus, 1991). However, it is the youngest students in a particular school setting (regardless of age) who are most at risk for being bullied. This is logical given the fact that the younger students in a building are usually physically weaker and more vulnerable than older, stronger students. There is a general decline in direct, physical bullying as age/grade increases while the relatively higher level of verbal abuse/aggression remains constant (Boulton & Underwood, 1992; Perry, Kusel, & Perry, 1988). Specifically, Perry et al. (1988) report nearly equal physical and verbal (15 verbal, 16 physical) Peer Nomination Inventory (PNI) victimization scores for males at grade 3 with a significant reduction in the physical victimization score at grade 6 (15 verbal, 9 physical) on the PNI. 
Effects of Bullying 
It is logical to assume that victims of bullying would be fearful and anxious in the environment in which the bullying took place. These victims might respond with avoidance/withdrawn/escape behaviors (skipping school, avoiding places at school, running away/suicide), more aggressive behaviors (such as bringing a weapon to school for self-defense or retaliation), and poor academic performance. It is important to remember that Perry et al. (1988) identified different types of victims and that the effects of bullying would differ as a function of victim type. 
Avoidance and withdrawal behaviors are likely to occur in the victims of bullies. The presence of a bully at school creates a climate of fear and intimidation for the individual victims of that bully, regardless of how pervasive the problem is. Students who are chronic victims of even mild abuse are likely to view school as an unhappy setting (Gilmartin, 1987) and are likely to avoid places within the school setting or the school completely. Data from the 1992 school year (Johnston, O,Malley, & Bachman, 1993) indicated that 16% of 8th graders felt unsafe at school some or most of the time and 7% of 8th graders did not go to school during the previous month because they felt unsafe at school. Even greater numbers of students take precautions while at school in order to insure their own safety. Twenty percent "stay away from certain places in school," 22% "stay away from certain places on school grounds," and 8% "stay away from school related events." Although not completely responsible for creating a school climate that students strive to avoid, bullying contributes to the serious problem of making school a place to be feared for many students. Effective schooling can not occur under conditions of intimidation and fear. 
In the Violent Schools-Safe Schools report (National Institute of Education, 1978), 56% of assault victims reported being afraid at school "sometimes" and 15% of the attack victims reported staying home "sometimes" out of fear of being hurt. In addition, 29% of victims reported that they occasionally brought weapons to school when only 9% of other students did so. Nine percent of 8th graders and 10% of 10th graders reported bringing a weapon (gun, knife, or club) to school at least once in the previous month. In extreme cases, students have committed suicide as a result of bullying or have killed the bully (Greenbaum, 1988). These data support the notion that fear for one's safety in school results in skipping school, avoiding areas of school, or engaging in illegal activities (weapons at school) in significant numbers. Almost one in five students reported having either no, one, or two friends at school, indicating that many victims have few peer-level resources for either problem solving or support. When a condition exists in which students fear for their safety (or their lives) and feel that they have little or no peer and/or teacher support, it is not surprising that an increase in school avoidance, in the number of weapons, and in both self-directed and interpersonal aggression is seen in the school setting. 
Although the impact of bullying on academic performance is less well understood, it would be logical to assume that the effects of skipping school, avoiding school-related activities, and fear for one's safety would be detrimental to academic progress. There is some evidence to support this position. Hazler, Hoover, and Oliver (1992) reported that 90% of students who were bullied stated that they experienced a drop in school grades. Olweus (1978) found that victims (boys) of bullying had somewhat lower grades than their peers. Perry, Kusel, and Perry (1988) found a significant, negative correlation between intelligence and level of victimization for males. 
Response of School Personnel to Bullying 
The response of school personnel to bullying is, at best, disappointing. Results of research conducted at different times and in different countries, provide a similar picture. More than 60% of the victims report that school personnel respond poorly, respond only"sometimes or never," or try to put a stop to the bullying "only once in a while or almost never" (Boulton & Underwood, 1992; Hoover, Oliver, & Hazler, 1992; Olweus, 1991a). It is clear that school personnel do relatively little to intervene in the bullying cycle at school. There may be a number of reasons for this. 
First, Stephenson and Smith (1988) report that 25% of teachers feel that it is sometimes helpful to ignore the problem. Because bullying often occurs in the form of verbal intimidation, isolation, and exclusion, teachers may view these behaviors as less serious than physical assaults where the "damage" is easily visible. Second, the social (passive) skills of the victims may be such that teachers are less motivated to intervene. Third, the behavior of the victim may play an important role as well. Boulton and Underwood (1992) reported that the effect size for the correlation between reported victimization and intervention by teachers was less than the reported frequency of bullying and intervention by teachers. This suggests that the child who is bullied will get less attention from adults than the child who bullies. Interviews with victims indicate that children who do not tell do so out of fear of reprisal. If this is the case, then victims might perceive that teachers and other school personnel either will not be sympathetic to their plight or will not be able to protect them. 
The majority of the research cited throughout in this article was consistent in stating that in order for bullying to be reduced significantly, schools must send a strong message to students and staff that bullying is inappropriate. Students are quick to indict school personnel for their failure to act both to protect victims and to deal effectively with bullies (Hazier, Hoover, & Oliver, 1992). Victims of bullies already believe that they are "victims" of their peers (the bullies). If these students also believe that they are victims of the system through the lack of protection and support by the school staff, then one can understand more clearly why students resort to avoidance and/or retaliation. It is clear that schools must promote the idea that adults will be supportive of victims and that school officials can provide a safe haven for all students while at school. 
SCHOOL-BASED INTERVENTIONS FOR BULLYING
Although few studies have been designed to evaluate the effects of intervention programs to reduce bullying (Olweus, 1991a) at a building-and district-level, most are anecdotal reports with limited outcome data. School-based intervention programs must seek to integrate strategies gleaned from research on topics that include organizational change, effective parent involvement, behavioral programs for students with aggressive and/or withdrawn behavior profiles, group counseling for perpetrators and victims, and effective building-based discipline procedures. In May 1987, a "Schoolyard Bully Practicum," sponsored by the National School Safety Center, was held at Harvard University to develop a prevention program for the United States. A wide range of strategies were identified to help educators and others control and prevent bullying. It was clear that the development of a comprehensive, integrated plan that could be implemented by school buildings across the United States was necessary in order to achieve the control and prevention of bullying. Many researchers and practitioners (Coie, Underwood, & Lochman, 1991; Dubow, Huesmann, & Eron, 1987; Floyd, 1985; Goldstein, 1988; Goldstein & Glick, 1987; Goldstein, Sprafkin, Gershaw, & Klein, 1980; Greenbaum, 1987, 1988; Guetzloe, 1992; Hazler, Hoover, & Oliver, 1992; Olweus, 1991b) have suggested a variety of district-, building-, classroom-, and student-level interventions. What follows is a set of recommended strategies and components necessary to construct a comprehensive plan to control and prevent bullying in schools. 
1. Promote facts, not myths, about bullying. Bullying is a significant and pervasive problem in America's schools. Fear has become a significant factor in the school behavior of many (15% to 20% students. Evidence exists that truancy, avoidance of school activities and peers, possible academic difficulties, and in extreme cases, suicide are linked to bullying. Films and videos are available for use with students and professional staff that can facilitate the promotion of accurate information. 
2. Dispel beliefs about aggressive behavior. The prevailing attitude that fighting and other forms of aggressive behavior are a normal part of "growing up" must be discarded. Schools must promote the belief that this type of behavior is completely unacceptable, develop policies and programs to deal effectively and quickly with aggression, and teach students alternatives to aggression. 
3. Conduct a school-wide assessment of bullying. Schools must determine how pervasive the bully problem is, the attitudes and beliefs of bullies and victims, the perception of students regarding how well the school handles bullying, and what students believe should be done. Olweus (1978, 1984) developed a direct assessment device for his research and Perry and colleagues (1988) developed a peer nomination procedure to assess the nature of bullying within student groups. 4. Develop a student code of conduct. Most schools have an existing code of conduct. However, students should participate in the development of the code that includes provisions to deal with bullying. The code should specify both appropriate and inappropriate relationships between students/students and students/faculty. The majority of school codes of conduct specify only inappropriate behaviors and do not include student involvement in their development. 
5. Provide counseling cervices for bullies and victims. Counseling services are most effective when there is an emphasis on the development of skills to replace aggressive behaviors with more appropriate ones or to replace avoidance/withdrawn behaviors with more assertive ones. The use of group social skills training is the intervention of choice (see Goldstein, 1988). 
6. Involve parents in the intervention process. The school usually involves the parents of the bully when disciplinary action is required, such as suspension or expulsion. Few schools routinely involve the parents of victims or the parents of bullies for purposes other than discipline. Some schools have adopted a "10 Day/lO Minute Suspension" program designed to encourage the parents' involvement in interventions for bullies. In this program, the length of the student's suspension is dependent on whether or not the parents will become involved with school personnel in an intervention program. The earlier the parents become involved, the shorter the suspension. Parents often have the same problems with their children at home that teachers have with the child in school. Therefore, involving parents in parent education, teaching parenting and child management skills, and linking home and school intervention programs are desirable components of a comprehensive plan. 
7. Implement intervention strategies specific to aggressive children. Approaches to intervention with aggressive students and their victims fall into five general categories: (a) behavior management; (b) self-control strategies; (c) social skills training; (d) information processing; and (e) cognitive perspective taking (Coie, Underwood, & Lochman, 1991). Larson (this issue) provides a critical review of intervention programs for aggressive students. How intervention programs are implemented is as important as the particular programs selected. Bullying is an interpersonal act conducted within a social setting. For that reason, interventions designed to reduce the bullying behavior and increase prosocial behavior should be implemented in a group setting and in a consistent manner. Intervention programs targeted at bully behavior should be implemented building wide, with all school staff (instructional, administrative, support, cafeteria, custodial, bus) trained to implement preventative and intervention strategies. This building wide strategy will facilitate generalization of both the intervention strategies and the effects of those strategies on student behavior. In addition, the building-wide program should be a multifaceted intervention process (Dubow, Huesmann, & Eron, 1987) that addresses the multiple components recommended by Coie, Underwood, and Lochman (1991). 
8. Accountability and evaluation. Teachers and students alike should be informed, on a regular basis, of the effects of the comprehensive schoolwide plan. A schoolwide tracking system should document the frequency of bully/victim problems (such as behavior referrals to the office, suspensions/expulsions) and these data should be reported to teachers and students monthly. Bullies and victims should be identified and included in intervention programs on a continuing basis. Teachers and students should be encouraged to set specific goals designed to reduce the rate of aggressive behavior while increasing the rate of prosocial behavior. Unless data routinely are provided to teachers and students, the true picture of a bully problem will not emerge. When this happens, the sensitivity of the students and staff to the problem will diminish and the motivation to support intervention programs will decline. Conversely, if the students and staff do receive data on the effectiveness of the intervention programs they are implementing, then the motivation to continue these programs will increase. 
Summary 
The available evidence indicates that the incidence of bullying is not decreasing and some evidence suggests that it is increasing. In either event, this is a problem that affects (with varying degrees of severity) 15% to 20% of the students in the United States, the absolute number of which is staggering. The effects of bullying contribute substantially to the development of an unsafe environment in schools and to a decline in the academic and social performance of students involved in bully/victim experiences. The number of students who are victims of assault, theft, and vandalism are few in number compared to those who are involved in bully/victim experiences. If school systems choose to limit interventions only to assaults, theft, and vandalism -- and limit interventions to these problems alone -- then little will be done to develop the school as a "safe haven" for students. 
The presence of bullying in a school indicates that the level of prosocial behavior and respect for one another is lacking. The research cited in this article supports the concept that students are poorly equipped to respond to bullies and that those same students believe that the adults in the school environment do little to discourage bullying. In essence, the belief of bullies that they can use power and intimidation to control their environment and the lack of response by school personnel results in the creation of an environment where few would want to spend their day. Whether bullying occurs in the form of physical aggression, intimidation in a power struggle, sexual harassment, ridicule, or teasing, the bottom line is that students are unable to demonstrate appropriate interpersonal skills and fear the environment they are in. Bullying is always inappropriate. The environment will change and the climate improve only when school systems choose to develop and implement a comprehensive plan designed to teach prosocial behavior, to limit aggressive behavior, and to teach skills that promote positive interactions between students. More importantly, however, school personnel must recognize that the problem is pervasive, that it contributes to the decline in academic and social progress of students, and that a comprehensive intervention plan must be implemented by the entire staff, throughout the school setting. Until then, however, bullies will continue to roam the halls of our nation's schools, unchecked and in control. 


Address correspondence about this manuscript to George M. Batsche, School Psychology Program, FAO 100U, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33620-7750. 
REFERENCES
Boulton, J. J., & Underwood, K. (1992). Bully/victim problems among middle school children British Journal of Educational Psychology, 62, 73-87. 
Coie, J. D., Underwood, M., & Lochman, J. E. (1991). Programmatic intervention with aggressive children in the school setting. In I. Rubin & D. Pepler (Eds.), The development and treatment of childhood aggression (pp. 389-41O). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Dodge, K. A., Coie, J. D., Pettit, G. S., & Price, J. M. (1990). Peer status and aggression in boys' groups: Developmental and contextual analyses. Child Development, 61, 1289-13O9. 
Dubow, E. F., Huesmann, L. R., & Eron, L. D. (1987). Mitigating aggression and promoting prosocial behavior in aggressive elementary schoolboys. Behavior Research and Therapy, 25, 527-531. 
Eron, L. D., Huesmann, R. L., Dubow, E., Romanoff, R., & Yarnel, P. W. (1987). Childhood aggression and its correlates over 22 years. In Childhood aggression and violence. New York: Plenum. 
Floyd, N. M. (1985). "Pick on somebody your own size?" Controlling victimization. The Pointer, 29, 917. 
Gilmartin, B. G. (1987). Peer group antecedents of severe love-shyness in males. Journal of Personality, 55, 467-489. 
Goldstein, A. P. (1988). The prepare curriculum. Champaign, IL: Research Press. 
Goldstein, A. P., & Glick, B. (1987). Aggression Replacement Training. Champaign, IL: Research Press. 
Goldstein, A. P., Sprafkin, R. P., Gershaw, J. J., & Klein, P. (1980). Skillstreaming the adolescent. Champaign, IL: Research Press. 
Greenbaum, S. (1988). School bully and victimization (Resource Paper). Malibu, CA: National School Safety Center. 
Greenbaum, S. (1987, November). What can we do about schoolyard bullying? Principal, 21-24. 
Guetzloe,E. (1992).Violent,aggressive, and antisocial students: What are we going to do with them? Preventing School Failure, 86, 4-9. 
Hazler, R. J., Hoover, J. H., & Oliver, R. (1992, November). What kids say about bullying. The Executive Educator, 20-22. 
Hoover, J. H., Oliver,R.,&Hazler, R. J. (1992). Bullying: Perceptions of adolescent victims in the midwestern USA. School Psychology International, 13, 516. 
Johnston, L. D., O'Malley, P. M., & Bachman, J. G. (1993). Monitoring the future study for goal 6 of the national education goals: A special report for the National Education Goals Panel. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan's Institute for Social Research. 
Lane, D. A. (1989). Bullying in school: The need for a integrated approach. School Psychology International, 10, 211-215. 
Loeber, R., & Dishion, T. J. (1984). Boys who fight at home and school: Family conditions influencing cross-setting consistency. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 52, 759-768. 
McGinnis, E., & Goldstein, A. P. (1984). Skillstreaming the elementary school child. Champaign, IL: Research Press. 
Murakami, Y. (1985). Bullies in the classroom. Japan Quarterly, 32, 407-409. 
National Education Goals Panel. (1993). The national education goals report: Volume one. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. 
National Institute of Education. (1978). Violent schools-safe schools. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare. 
Olweus, D. (1973). Personality and aggression. In J. K. Coie & D. D. Jensen (Eds.), Nebraska symposium on motivation, 1972 (pp. 261-321). Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. 
Olweus, D. (1978). Aggression in the schools: Bullies and whipping boys. New York: Wiley. 
Olweus, D. (1984). Aggressors and their victims: Bullying at school. In N. Frude & H. Gault (Eds.), Disruptive behavior disorders in schools (pp. 5776). New York: Wiley. 
Olweus, D. (1991a). Bully/victim problems among school children: Basic facts and effects of a school based intervention program. In I. Rubin & D. Pepler (Eds.), The development and treatment of childhood aggression (pp. 411-447). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Olweus, D. (1991b). Victimization among school children. In R. Baenninger (Ed.), Targets of violence and aggression (pp. 45-1O2). Holland: Elsevier Science Publishers. 
Perry, D. G., Kusel S. J. & Perry, I,. C. (1988). Victims of peer aggression. Developmental Psychology, 24, 807-814. 
Perry, D. G., Williard, J. C., & Perry, L. C. (1990). Peers' perceptions of the consequences that victimized children provide aggressors. Child Development, 61, 1310-1325. 
Stephenson, P., & Smith, D. (1989). Bullying in the junior school. In D. P. Tattum & D. A. Lane (Eds.), Bullying in schools (pp. 45-57). Stoke-on-Trent: Trentham Books. 
Whitney, I., & Smith, P. K. (1993). A survey of the nature and extent of bullying in junior/middle and secondary schools. Educational Research, 35, 325. 
~~~~~~~~ 
George M. Batsche, Howard M. Knoff University of South Florida 
George M. Batsche, Ed.D, is Associate Professor in the School Psychology Program at the University of South Florida, Tampa, FL. His research interests include behavior intervention and assessment strategies for children and youth with behavior and emotional difficulties and group (building/ classroom) intervention systems 
Howard M. Knoff, PhD, is a Professor and Director of the School Psychology Program at the University of South Florida. His research focuses on consultation and supervision processes, organizational assessment and school reform, and the link between personality assessment and intervention. 

Copyright of School Psychology Review is the property of National Association of School Psychologists and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.
Source: School Psychology Review, 1994, Vol. 23 Issue 2, p165, 10p.
Item Number: 9501303824 
Top of Form

Bottom of Form


