
urnal of Educational Research
ISSN: 0022-0671 (Print) 1940-0675 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/vjer20
Observations of Bullying in the Classroom Rona S. Atlas & Debra J. Pepler
To cite this article: Rona S. Atlas & Debra J. Pepler (1998) Observations of Bullying in the Classroom, The Journal of Educational Research, 92:2, 86-99, DOI: 10.1080/00220679809597580
To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00220679809597580
Published online: 01 Apr 2010.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 888
View related articles
Citing articles: 165 View citing articles
                   Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=vjer20
    Download by: [University of Washington Libraries] Date: 20 April 2017, At: 10:21
  
 Observations of Bullying in the Classroom
RONA S. ATLAS DEBRA J. PEPLER York University
ABSTRACT The prevalence and nature of bullying was assessed on the basis of observations of children's interactions in the classroom. This study was based on a systemic-develop- mental model of bullying and victimization. Participants were drawn from 1 public school in metropolitan Toronto. Twenty- seven children (19 boys, 8 girls) identified by teachers as aggressiveand nonaggressive were targeted for filming. The 27 children were identified from the total number of students (A' = 190) in the 8 classrooms.There were 60 bullying episodes observed from 28 hr of video and remote audio recordings of classroom observations. Bullying occurred twice every hour in the classroom and was short in duration. The boys and girls bullied at the same rate. Peers were involved in some capacity (from actively participating to passively onlooking) in 85% of the bullying episodes. Results suggest that bullying unfolds in a peer context in the classroom and is related to the type of classroom activity and individual characteristics of children involved in bullying conflicts.
Bullying has recently become the focus of psychologi- cal research (Olweus, 1991, 1993; Pepler & Craig, 1995; Stephenson & Smith, 1989; Tattum, 1989; Ziegler & Pepler, 1993). Studies indicate that a large proportion of children are involved in bullying at school (Besag, 1989; Olweus, 199I , 1993; Perry, Kusel, & Perry, 1988; Tattum,
1989; Ziegler & Pepler). Between 7% and 34% of school- aged children are involved in bullying occasionally during the school term in both the capacity of bullies and victims of bullying (Besag, 1989; Olweus, 1987; Perry et al.; Roland, 1989b; Stephenson & Smith; Yates & Smith, 1989; Ziegler & Pepler). The results of survey data indicate that bullying is pervasive in the school milieu (Olweus, I99 I ; Perry et al.; Stephenson & Smith; Ziegler & Pepler). To date, much of the research on bullying has relied on self- report data, teacher report data, and peer nominations, which may be of limited value in assessing situational vari- ables that influence bullying (Olweus, 1978, 1991; Perry et al.; Roland, 1989; Stephenson & Smith).
In contrast, we used naturalistic observations of bullying in the classroom with video cameras and remote micro- phones (Pepler & Craig, 1995). Observations in the present study comprised naturally occurring bullying interactions in
the classroom. Our research makes a unique contribution by assessing the prevalence and the nature of naturally occur- ring bullying interactions in the classroom.
In this study, we adopted a systemic-developmental model of bullying and victimization. A systemic-develop- mental framework incorporates the assessment of a wide array of factors that may contribute to the development of aggressive behavior: individual factors, interindividual interaction, social relations, and cultural and ecological conditions (Cairns & Cairns, I99 I ) . This theoretical per- spective requires an integration of individual difference, social-interactional, and ecological perspectives. Bullying behavior is an interaction that occurs between an individual bully and victim and unfolds within a social ecological con- text. The bullying interaction is influenced by a number of factors: (a) the individual characteristics of the bully and victim, (b) the dyadic interactional processes between the individual bully and victim, (c) the presence of peers and teachers, and (d) the context in which bullying behavior unfolds. Although individual characteristics of the child play an important role in the development of bullying behavior, both dyadic interactional processes between the individual bully and victim and the broader social context in which bullying occurs are equally important to our under- standing of bullying interactions (Cairns & Cairns; Coie & Jacobs, 1993).
With an increased understanding of the characteristics of bullies and victims, the nature of their interactions (dyadic features), and the social context in which bullying occurs, we are better equipped to address the problem of bullying within our schools and in the larger society (Cairns & Cairns, 1991; Coie & Jacobs, 1993). Within the context of the present study, we examined the prevalence and the nature of bullying i n relation to individual characteristics of bullies and victims (gender and aggressiveness) within bul- lying episodes in the classroom. We also studied the char- acteristics of the bully-victim dyad, specifically assessing
Address correspondence and requestsfor reprints to Debra J. Pepler; LaMarsh Research Centre on Violence and Conflict Reso- lution, York University, 4700 Keele Street, North York, Ontario, Cunnda, M3J I P3.
86
 NovemberlDecemher 1998 [Vol. 92(No. 2)]
87
the physical power imbalance between the bully and the victim. Finally, we examined the social ecological factors that comprised the frequency and nature of peer and teacher involvement and the structure within the classroom in which bullying interactions occurred.
Bullying is a form of aggressive behavior with an imbal- ance of power; the dominant person(s) intentionally and repeatedly causes distress by tormenting or harassing anoth- er less dominant person(s) (Besag, 1989; Olweus, 1991; Roland, 1989; Smith, 1991; Smith & Thompson, 1991; Stephenson & Smith, 1989; Tattum, 1989). This aggressive behavior can be expressed physically (e.g., kicking, hitting) or verbally (e.g., name calling); it can be direct or indirect (Olweus, 1978, 199I , 1993). Direct bullying refers to open attacks on the victim-kicking, pushing, hitting, teasing, taunting, mocking, and threatening and intimidating (Far- rington, 1993; Olweus, 1991). Indirect bullying refers to social isolation, social ostracism, exclusion, and nasty gos- sip (Olweus, 1991, 1993; Roland, 1989). Indirect bullying involves manipulating the social status of an individual within his or her peer group by changing the way others perceive and respond to that individual (Bjorkqvist, Oster- man, & Kaukianinen, 1992; Lagerspetz, Bjorkqvist, & Pel- tonen, 1988).
These forms of indirect or psychological bullying include telling false stories about others, saying bad things behind people’s backs, telling others not to be someone’s friend, and trying to persuade others to dislike a certain person (Bjorkqvist, Lagerspetz, & Kaukianinen, 1992a; Crick & Grotpeter, 1995; Lagerspetz et al., 1988). In the case of social exclusion and nasty gossip, the aggressor remains anonymous often by manipulating others to attack the vic- tim; it is unlikely that the aggressor is retaliated against (Bjorkqvist et al., 1992b).For more details on the definition of bullying and bullying behaviors, see Appendix A.
The first variilble that must be considered within a sys- temic-developmental framework for bullying is the individ- ual. The work of Olweus (1991), based within a personali- ty perspective, has been fundamental in identifying the characteristics of bullies and victims. Olweus (1993) described boys who bully as having an aggressive personal- ity style combined with physical strength. Male victims, on the other hand, were characterized as being physically weak and timid and having an anxious personality style (Olweus,
1993). Gender is another individual factor that relates to bullying interactions. On self-report questionnaires, boys are more likely than girls to acknowledge that they have bullied others (e.g., Roland, 1989; Ziegler & Pepler, 1993). That finding is consistent with the traditional view that males are more aggressive than females (Maccoby & Jack- lin, 1974). Recently, researchers have questioned the strength of gender differences in aggression (e.g., Hyde, 1984). When forms of aggression, other than physical aggression are examined, gender differences are less pro- nounced (Bjorkqvist, Lagerspetz, & Kaukianinen, 1992; Bjorkqvist, Osterman, & Kaukianinen, 1992; Roland,
1989). In playground observations of a wide range of bully- ing behaviors, boys and girls engaged in bullying at the same rate (Craig, 1993). There does not appear to be a gen- der difference in the prevalence of victimization (Ziegler & Pepler). There is. however, a gender difference with respect to the type of aggression one is exposed to: Girls are more likely to be victimized by indirect and subtle forms of bul- lying than boys are (Whitney & Smith, 1993). There is a need to expand our understanding of individual factors as they relate to bullying interactions.
The second variable that needs to be considered within the systemic-developmental framework is the dyadic rela- tionship between the bully and the victim. The most salient feature within this dyad is the power imbalance between the bully and the victim. Research on bullying highlights the im- portance of a power imbalance between an individual bully and victim; the bully always has more power than the victim, and the victim is unable to defend himself or herself under those circumstances (Besag, 1989; Olweus, I99 I , 1993; Roland, 1989). The presence of a power imbalance distin- guishes bullying from other forms of aggressive behavior (Olweus, 1993). Olweus (1993) purported that an interac- tion is not considered bullying when students of approxi- mately equal physical and psychological strength are fight- ing. The bully’s power over the victim may derive from relative individual characteristics (e.g., strength, size) or from the alignment of others within the social context (e.g., peers aligning with the bully; Craig, 1993).
The third variable in the theoretical model comprises the social ecology of bullying. That extends the focus beyond the interaction between the bully and the victim to include other individuals ( e g , peers and teacher) and the structure of the social context in the classroom. Bullying affects the immediate players and also has consequences for peers who are either actively involved or who witness the interaction (Olweus, 1978; Tattum, 1989). Aggression usually arises within a group context and may be influenced by the group (DeRosier, Cillessen, Coie, & Dodge, 1994; Hartup, 1983). Observational research on bullying on the playground revealed that peers were present in 85% of the bullying episodes and only intervened to stop bullying in 11% of those episodes (Craig, 1993). Peers may inadvertently rein- force the behavior by not reprimanding the bully, or they may be drawn into the interaction to participate actively (Craig, 1993; Olweus, 1978; Tattum, 1989). On the play- ground, peers were actively involved in two thirds of the bullying episodes (Craig, 1993), suggesting that peers may be pressured to get involved in the interaction for fear that they too may be victimized (Tattum, 1989).Further, peers who witness bullying may experience considerable discom- fort (Ziegler & Pepler, 1993). A survey assessing the level of bullying in Toronto schools indicated that 61% of stu- dents sampled reported that witnessing bullying is unpleas- ant; approximately 33% of peers reported that they could
join in and bully another student (Ziegler & Pepler). Peer involvement may be a salient factor that perpetuates and
 88
The Journal of Educational Research
sustains bullying interactions whether or not peers become activeparticipants.
From a social ecological perspective, the assessment of bullying must also include the role of the teacher in bullying interactions. Surveys indicate that teachers are generally unaware of bullying and may do very little to intercede (Besag, 1989; Olweus, 1991; Smith, 1991; Ziegler & Pepler, 1993).Ziegler and Pepler found that 47% of victimized pri- mary school students reported that they had told a teacher. Victims of peer abuse may not be inclined to report attacks to their teacher because they fear reprisal from their aggres- sors or they blame themselves (Smith; Besag).Twenty-eight percent of victimized primary students reported that they had not told a teacher or a parent about being victimized at school (Ziegler & Pepler). Smith referred to bullying as the “silent nightmare” because there is a code of secrecy where- by victimized students and witnesses to bullying do not report the act. Yates and Smith (1989) found that only 15 out of 51 students who had been bullied told their teachers or school counselors about the incident. Even when teachers are aware of bullying, they may do very little to intercede.
Self-report questionnaires revealed that approximately 40% of students in the primary grades responded that teach- ers intervene to stop bullying only “once in a while or almost never” (Olweus, 1993), suggesting that teachers may do little to intervene. Besag (1989) suggested that teachers or adults in the school community may not know how to solve the problem. Also, bullying is a covert activity that is kept from the view of adults (Smith, 1991).As a result, it is difficult for adults to achieve a comprehensive understand- ing of the factors that influence the incidence and nature of bullying behavior.
Finally, according to the theoretical model, the structure of the social context may be critical in examining bullying. The school playground is the location where bullying is most likely to occur, followed by the classroom and hall- ways (Olweus, 1993; Stephenson & Smith, 1989; Whitney & Smith, 1993; Ziegler & Pepler, 1993). Bullying tends to take place in relatively unsupervised areas such as the play- ground; teachers and adults may have difficulty understand- ing the extent of the problem (Craig & Pepler, 1997; Olweus, 1993). Craig and Pepler’s (1996) playground observations revealed that adults were in close proximity to only 17% of the bullying episodes. In the Toronto survey, 50% of students and 39% of teachers acknowledged that bullying occurs in the classroom (Ziegler & Pepler). In Eng- land, 30% of elementary and middle school students report- ed being bullied in the classroom (Whitney & Smith). The presence of the teacher in the classroom may do little to deter children from bullying.
Given that the intensity of teacher supervision may vary by the structure of the learning activity within the class- room, this ecological factor may also relate to the incidence of bullying. In the present study, classroom structure refers to the amount of teacher supervision or teacher-student interaction. Teacher-led tasks, by definition, are highly
supervised with a great deal of teacher-student interaction or teacher directive (Houston-Stein, Friedrick-Cofer, & Susman, 1977). In contrast, group and solitary tasks allow students to work more independently with less direct super- vision than teacher-led tasks. Children in less structured classrooms were more aggressive than those in highly struc- tured classrooms (Houston-Stein et al.). In this study, we examined three types of structure: teacher-led tasks, group tasks, and solitary tasks. The structure of the learning activ- ity in the classroom has been shown to influence children’s behavior (Houston-Stein et al.).
In summary, the theoretical model suggests that a wide array of variables influence bullying behavior. To date, empirical work on bullying has relied exclusively on self-, peer-, and teacher-report methods (Olweus, 1978, 1993; Perry et al., 1988; Roland, 1989; Stephenson & Smith, 1989).There are no naturalistic observations of bullying in the classroom to verify those reports. Although the methods indicate the occurrence of bullying, they may be of limited value in assessing the confluence of individual, dyadic interactional, and social ecological factors that influence bullying interactions in the classroom. From a theoretical perspective, bullying must be studied not only as an indi- vidual characteristic but also as a dyadic interactional process that generally occurs within the context of the peer group and the broader social context in which it unfolds (Craig, 1993; Olweus, 1991, 1993). Observations of natu- rally occurring bullying interactions may provide insights beyond those of self-report, validate some aspects of self- reports, and extend o u r understanding of behavior patterns that may not be apparent through self-reports.
In this study, we examined bullying in the classroom by observingchildren’sclassroom interactions.Observationsof naturally occurring bullying interactions with video cameras and remote microphones provide a research tool to gain access into a world not normally privy to adults (Pepler & Craig, 1995). That observational research permits an assess- ment of individual characteristics of bullies and victims, fea- tures of the dyadic interaction between the bully and the vic- tim, and social ecological factors such as peer and teacher involvement and the structure of the environment in which bullying behavior occurs. Our use of naturalistic observations allowed us to see bullying behavior in a natural setting (for a more detailed review of the method see Pepler & Craig); external validity for the observations is relatively high.
Our primary objective in the present study was to exam- ine the prevalence and nature of bullying interactions in the classroom. A secondary objective of the present study was to describe the individual characteristics of children involved in bullying interactions, dyadic features of the interaction, and social ecological factors related to bullying within the classroom.
Method
Our research is an extension of a naturalistic study on peer relations of aggressive and nonaggressive children
 November/Decemher 1998 [Vol. 92(No. 2)]
89
observed on the playground and in the classroom. Survey and observational data were collected on teacher-identified aggressive, nonaggressive, and comparison children. The previous study focused on the frequency of prosocial and antisocial behavior patterns on the playground and in the classroom to assess the effectiveness of a social skills train- ing program (Pepler, Craig, & Roberts, 1998; Roberts, Pep- ler, & Craig, 1998). In the present study, we focused specif- ically on the nature of bullying and victimization within the classroom context. In addition, we coded bullying from the videotaped observations of children’s interactions in the classroom.
Participants
Participants in the present study included all children who were observed in bullying interactionson 28 hr of videotape of classroom observations drawn from the previous study. Participants comprised students from one public school in metropolitan Toronto; they were from low- to middle- income families and ethnically diverse backgrounds.
The focal children filmed in the previous peer relations study included 17 aggressive children ( I 2 boys and 5 girls) aged 6-12 and 17 nonaggressive children who were nomi- nated by teachers and matched on age, gender, and ethnici- ty. Observations were filmed in eight classrooms-five pri- mary classrooms (Grades 1-3) and three junior classrooms (Grades 4-6). The average number of children per class- room was 24 and ranged from 17 to 32. There were 190 children (98 boys and 92 girls) in the eight classrooms in which the focal children were filmed. Each focal child was filmed in the classroom for 1 hr.
The sample in the present study included all focal chil- dren in the peer relations study who were observed in a bul- lying episode in the classroom. Within this sampling frame, we coded all bullying episodes in which the focal children were involved as a bully, victim, or peer actively participat- ing in the episode or passively watching it. In this study, we observed that 27 (19 boys and 8 girls) of the 34 focal chil- dren in the classroom were either bullies or victims in bul- lying interactions. We observed one additional child who was a bully-victim when a focal child was a peer participant in the bullying episode. Therefore, the sample for the pres- ent study was 28 children (20 boys and 8 girls). In this study, the opportunity sample comprised all children in the peer relations study (190) who interacted with the focal children and who were observed in bullying interactions in the classroom. but who were not identified as focal children.
Observation Procedures, Categories, and Ratings
The video camera was set up overlooking the classroom and was operated by a trained video technician who was present in the classroom for all of the filming. During film- ing each focal child wore a remote microphone and a pock- et-sized wireless transmitter that hung in a pouch around his
or her neck. The remote microphone and transmitter record- ed both the focal child’s speech and the speech of peers in proximity to the focal child. The receiver was connected directly into the camera so that the sound images were recorded simultaneously onto the videotape (Pepler & Craig, 1995). All focal children were aware that they were being filmed. That strategy for observational research has been described as being advantageous for examining covert social interactions (Asher & Gabriel). Wireless transmis- sion permits observers to capture children’s covert verbal and nonverbal behaviors while not being proximal to the interaction and thereby limiting participants’ reactivity to the camera (Asher & Gabriel, 1993). The behavioral pat- terns observed with both a video camera and a remote microphone (Pepler & Craig, 1995) were similar to those observed on the playground with only a video camera (Serbin, Marchessault, McAffer, Peters, & Schwartzman,
1993) and in the classroom (Coie & Dodge, 1988). We believe that the cost, in terms of intrusiveness, of using a remote microphone are outweighed by the benefits of acquiring a verbal record, particularly for the study of covert behaviors such as bullying.
The technician videotaped 28 hr of observations in the classroom-I5 hr in the winter and 13 hr in the spring. The number of hours spent filming boys (19 hr) was approxi- mately twice that for girls (9 hr), corresponding to their rep- resentation in the sample. The discrepancy in the number of hours spent filming boys and girls may be related to the cri- teria used to identify aggressive and nonaggressive children in the peer relations study. Aggressive male and female chil- dren were identified originally for a social skills training program on the basis of criteria that typify male aggressive, disruptive, and noncompliant behavior (e.g., hits and kicks other children; Bjorkqvist, Lagerspetz. & Kaukianinen,
1992). Aggressive female behavior may differ from male aggressive behavior (Bjorkqvist et al., 1992a; Crick & Grot- peter, 1995; Lagerspetz et al., 1988).Aggressive girls in the present study may be underrepresented. In all of the classes in which observations were filmed, the teacher was female.
There were two phases of coding for the present study. First, bullying episodes were identified by two female observers who were blind to the group membership (aggres- sive and nonaggressive) of the children. The criteria for identification of bullying episodes included a power imbal- ance, intent to harm, and victim distress. (For more details of the identification criteria see Appendix A.) Bullying episodes were identified from the classroom observations with an interrater reliability kappa coefficient of .81. Sec- ond, bullying episodes were coded, by one male and one female observer (the first author and a researcher) to exam- ine the nature and prevalence of bullying interactions in the classroom.
We developed the coding scheme on the basis of the sys- temic-developmental framework. In other words, individual characteristics, features of the dyadic interactions, and the social ecological variables were all coded. (See Appendix A
 90
The Journal of Educational Research
for definitions of coding categories.) The nature of bullying interactions was examined by coding the type of bullying (verbal and physical) and type of aggression (direct and indirect) for each bullying episode. We identified individual characteristics for all bullies and victims, including gender and aggression group. Features of the dyadic interaction focusing on the power imbalance were coded. The variables for assessing power imbalance were ratings of height and weight differential. For this study, the differential or relative height and weight were of interest, rather than actual height and weight. The ratings were based on the relative heights and weights as observed on the videotape, which could be coded reliably. (Discrete heights and weights were not included because they were unreliable.) To assess the social ecological factors that influence bullying interactions, the coders translated peer intervention, peer involvement (rang- ing from passive onlooking to active participation), and teacher presence and interventions for each bullying inter- action. The coders also assessed classroom structure, a meas- ure of the ecological factors in the classroom context. Three types of classroom activity structure were coded-teacher- led, group, and solitary tasks.
Of the 70 bullying episodes initially identified, an addition- al pair of coders classified 68 episodes. The two episodes not identified by both groups were dropped from the analysis. Reliability assessments were conducted for 47% of the tapes. The average percentage agreements using Scott’s (1955) cor- rection ranged from 76 to 100. This index of interrater agree- ment takes chance agreement into account when calculating percentage agreement (Scott, 1955).In the present study, all categories had a percentage agreement of 76 or above so no variables were discarded in the contextual coding.
After observing each episode, the coders completed a global rating scale to assess subjective impressions of the episode. Coders assessed participants’ reactivity to the cam- era as a potential threat to the naturalistic element of the observations. By coding the frequency with which children oriented to the camera, the coders rated reactivity of bullies, victims, peers, and adults on a 5-point scale ranging from playing up to the camera a lot to not playing up to the cam- era at all. Global ratings indicated that bullies and victims were reactive to the camera in 5% of the bullying episodes. Teachers were not judged to be reactive to the camera in any of the bullying episodes. In 2% of the episodes, peers were rated as reactive to the filming. In general, children were seldom judged to be reactive to the camera; one may assume that the observed interactions had relatively high ecological validity.
Results
We organized the results according to the systemic-devel- opmental framework. Results are reported in terms of indi- vidual characteristics of bullies and victims, features of the dyadic interaction, and social ecological factors that influ- ence bullying interactions in the classroom.
Prevalence of Bullying Interactions
We observed each focal child for 30 min at two intervals within 2-5 days during the winter and again in the spring. There were 68 episodes of bullying on 28 hr of videotape, for an average of 2.4 bullying episodes per hour. Eight episodes (11%) were uncodeable and therefore dropped from the analyses. An episode was considered to be uncodeable when (a) the bullying interaction was inaudible but the children were visible or (b) the bullying was audible but the children were not visible in the camera frame (e.g., behind a shelving unit or out in the hallway). Fifty-four percent of the bullying episodes were observed in the winter and 45% were observed in the spring. The respective rates were 3.6 and 3.5 bullying episodes per hour. A binomial test revealed no significant dif- ference in the frequency of bullying episodes during the win- ter and spring observations (Z = .73, p = .23). There were no seasonal effects so all results were collapsed over time.
The Nature of Bullying Interactions
Each bullying episode was timed from the beginning of the bullying interaction until the bully or victim disengaged from the interaction. The mean duration of bullying epi- sodes was 26 s (SD= 35.4 s) with a range from 2 to 227 s.
The type of aggression (verbal, physical, or verbal and physical) was coded for each bullying episode. Verbal aggression (e.g., name-calling) was observed in 53% of the episodes, physical aggression (e.g., hitting, kicking, push- ing) was observed in 30%, and a combination of verbal and physical aggression was observed in 17% of the episodes. In the classroom, the boys and girls bullied at the same rate, .5 and .4 episodes per hour, respectively. A chi-square analysis revealed no significant gender differences with respect to the type of aggression displayed in the bullying episodes, ~ ~ (N2=,60) = .92,p = .63.
Sixty-five percent of the episodes comprised direct bully- ing (face-to-face confrontation), 30% comprised indirect bullying (manipulation of the peer group), and 5% of the episodes comprised both direct and indirect bullying. A weapon was defined as an object used for attack or in defense of an attack. In two episodes an object was observed during the bullying incident. A bully used a pen to destroy another student’s work; in the other case, the bully hit another student. Victims were not observed using objects in defense in any of the bullying episodes.
Overall, there was more direct than indirect physical bul- lying. Twenty-eight percent of the bullying episodes corn- prised direct physical bullying; only 2% of the bullying episodes comprised indirect physical bullying (destroying someone’s schoolwork). In 23% of the episodes, we observed direct verbal bullying; in 28% of the bullying episodes, we observed indirect verbal bullying. A chi- square analysis revealed no association between gender and type of bullying, ~ ~ (N2=,60) = 1.4,p = SO.(Examples of bullying episodes are presented in Appendix B.)
 NovemberDecember 1998 [Vol. 92(No. 2)]
91
The coders categorized gossiping and social exclusion as distinct forms of indirect bullying because they differ from other forms of overt bullying (verbal and physical) and they involve relational issues (Crick & Grotpeter, 1995).Spread- ing false rumors or telling persons not to be another child’s friend are examples of verbal indirect gossip and social exclusion, respectively. Those forms of relational aggres- sion involve intentional manipulation of peer relationships to damage another child’s friendships and to purposefully create feelings of insecurity (Crick & Grotpeter). Gossiping and social exclusion were coded in 22% and 13% of bully- ing episodes, respectively. In 5 of the 13 episodes that involved gossip, the coders observed a female bully; in 8 of the 13 episodes that involved gossip, the coders observed a male bully. A chi-square analysis revealed a nonsignificant relationship between gender of the bully and gossip as a meansofbullying,x2(I, N=60)=.02,p=38.In7ofthe 8 episodes that involved social exclusion, the bully was male; in 1 of the episodes that involved social exclusion, the bully was female. A chi-square test for significance was not conducted because of the low number of participants in each cell.
Individual Cliuructeristics of Bullies and Victims
Forty-two children were observed in bullying interac- tions as either bullies, or victims, both representing 22% of the 190 students from the eight classrooms. In the class- room, 14 children were observed bullying other children, 17 children were being victimized, and I 1 children were both bullying and being victimized. Those children were catego- rized as bully-victims because they were bullies in one interaction and victims in another interaction.
Sex cfbullies arid victims. The analysis examining the sex representation of bullies, victims, and bully-victims revealed that of the 14 bullies, 8 were male and 6 were female.Ofthe I7victims,12weremale,4werefemale,and the sex of 1 of the victims could not be determined from the videotaped observations. That information could not be pro- vided by the teacher because confidentiality was assured for all the children filmed. Nine of the 1 1 bully-victims were male and 2 were female. The representation of boys and girls coded in bullying episodes in the classroom may have been influenced by the fact that there were more boys than girls in the targeted sample. To assess gender differences in frequency of bullying and victimization, we controlled for hours of observations of boys ( 19 hr) and girls (9 hr) as a proportion of time filmed. Boys were victimized more fre- quently than girls in the classroom. Boys and girls were vic- timized at a rate of 2.1 and 1.6 episodes per hour, respec- tively. There were no differences associated with the frequency of bullying. Boys and girls were equally likely to bully at a rate of approximately two episodes per hour.
Group membership. In the previous study, regarding peer relations of aggressive and nonaggressive children, students were assigned to different groups on the basis of whether
they were identified by teachers ss being aggressive or nonaggressive. In the present study, we examined group membership (aggressive, nonaggressive, or opportunity sample) of bullies, victims, and bully-victims. Of the 14 bullies, 8 children were in the aggressive sample and 1 child was in the nonaggressive sample. The remaining 5 children observed as bullies in the classroom were in the opportuni- ty sample. Of the 17 children observed as victims, 2 were from the aggressive group, 2 were from the nonaggressive group, and 13 were from the opportunity sample. Finally, 4 of the bully-victims were from the aggressive sample, 1 bully-victim was from the nonaggressive sample, and 6 bully-victims were from the opportunity sample. The per- centages of aggressive children involved in bullying episodes are reported in Table 1.
Aggressive children were significantly more likely to be involved in bullying episodes as bullies than were nonag- gressive children in the classroom ( Z = 3.8, p < .OOl). The coders observed 12 of the 14 aggressive children bullying and 2 ( I bully-victim) of the 14 nonaggressive children bullying.
Bully-Victim Dyadic Interactional Features
Differential height and weight between the bully and vic- tim were coded for each episode. Those categories provid- ed an indicator of the power imbalance between the bully and the victim. The categories were not a measure of actu- al height and weight but rather a relative estimate of height and weight of individual bullies and victims on a per episode basis. Bullies were coded as being taller than vic- tims in 37% of the bullying episodes. In 18% of the episodes, bullies were coded as being the same height as victims; in 12% of the episodes, bullies were coded as being shorter than victims. In 33% of the bullying episodes the height differential could not be determined because a large proportion of bullying episodes involved indirect bullying in which the victim was not in the camera frame.
Bullies were coded as being heavier than victims in 38% Table l.-Group Membership of Bullies, Victims, and Bully-
Victims
Group
Bully
Sample Agg. Nonagg. Opp.
Total
I1 8I514
% 57 7 36 IOU Victim
I1 271.117
?+ 12 12 76 I00 Bully-victim
n4I6II 9% 36 9 5s 100
NoIP. Agg. = aggression:Nonagg. = nonaggresbion;Opp. = opportunity.
 92
The Journal of Educational Research
of the bullying episodes. In 25% of the episodes, bullies were judged to be the same weight as victims; in 9% of the episodes, bullies were coded as being lighter than victims. In 28% of the episodes, differential weight was uncodeable. For bullying episodes in which there was indirect bullying, differential weight between the bully and the victim could not be determined.
Social Ecological Factors in Bullying Episodes
Peer involvement. Peers participated in a variety of roles in 85% of the bullying episodes ranging from active involvement (participating in the bullying by hitting or ver- bally abusing the victim) to passive onlooking (observing the incident). Peers were observed as actively participating in the bullying interaction in 32% of the episodes. They were observed in joint activity (playing or working with those involved in the incident) in 52% of the bullying episodes. Peers in parallel activity (playing or working in close proximity to those involved in the incident but not in the same activity) were observed in 27% of the bullying episodes. Finally, in 13% of the episodes, peers were onlook- ers to the bullying interaction. (Frequency data of the nature of peer involvement in bullying episodes are reported in Table 2.) Percentages do not equal 100% because the fre- quencies reflect roles that numerous peers could assume in bullying episodes.
Peer intervention. Peer interventions were coded as socially appropriate or socially inappropriate. The peer’s attempt to help the victim(s) in a prosocial manner was coded as socially appropriate (e.g., informing and involving an adult or talking directly to the bully or victim). A social- ly inappropriate intervention was coded when a peer attempted to stop the bullying by using aggressive tactics (e.g., by threatening or physically assaulting the bully). Ineffective or socially inappropriate peer interventions were
not coded in any of the bullying episodes. Peers were pres- ent (i.e., observed in the camera frame) in 5 1 of the 60 bul- lying episodes. In 10% of the bullying episodes, peers inter- venedtostopthebullying.Peerswerejudgedtobeawareof the bullying interaction in 43 of the episodes in which they were present in the camera frame. Peer awareness of the bullying interaction was judged on the basis of the number of episodes in which peers were present in that particular capacity. (Frequency data of peer awareness of bullying episodes are shown in Table 2.) When peer intervention was considered as a proportion of time that peers were aware of the bullying incident, they intervened 14% of the time. As expected,given the ratio of boys to girls in the targeted sam- ple, twice as many of the prosocial interveners were males as females, 67% and 33%, respectively.
Teacher intervention. Teachers intervened in 11 (18%) bullying episodes. Often children bully when the teacher’s back is turned or when the teacher is on the other side of the classroom. Teachers were observed in the camera frame in an additional 19 episodes; therefore, they intervened in 37% of the episodes during which they were in close proximity (i.e., observed in the camera frame).
Teachers were observed in the camera frame in 30 of the 60 episodes. They were rated by the coders as being aware of the bullying interaction in 15 of the 30 episodes in which they were present in the camera frame. Teachers were rated as unaware of bullying in 13 of the episodes; their aware- ness of bullying could not be determined in two of the episodes. In summary, teachers were aware of bullying inci- dents approximately 50% of the time when they were in close proximity to the interaction (i.e., in the camera frame). They intervened in 11 (73%) of the 15 episodes in which they were judged to be aware of bullying interactions.
In the classroom, there was no overall difference in the number of bullying episodes in which teachers and peers intervened (Z = -I .3, p = .19). Of the 60 bullying episodes, teachers intervened in 11 episodes and peers intervened in 6 episodes. Our findings on the frequency of intervention as a function of how often teachers and peers were proximal to the bullying interactions showed that teachers intervened significantly more than peers did (Z = 2.7, p < .05). Peers were observed in 5 1 of the bullying episodes and intervened in 6 of them; teachers were observed in 29 of the bullying episodes and intervened in 1 1 of them.
Structure of the classroom. One objective of this study was to describe the structure of the classroom and learning activities during which bullying occurred (e.g., teacher-led tasks, group tasks, and solitary tasks). Coders identified the type of teaching method used in the classroom when the bullying interactions occurred. A chi-square analysis of the expected frequencies of bullying based on the total time filmed in each of the categories revealed a significant asso- ciation with classroom activity, ~ ~ (N2=,60) = 199.37,p < .OO1). Sixty-five percent of bullying episodes occurred when children were involved in solitary tasks. Twenty-three percent of bullying episodes occurred when children were
Table 2.-Nature Peer role
Active
of Peer Involvement in Bullying Episodes
Episodes
Episodes peer(s) aware
n 19 19
% 32 100 In joint activity
n 31 29
% 52 94 Parallel
n 16 1
o/o 2 1 44 Onlooker
n87
% 13 88 Intervener
n66 96 effective 10 100
 NovemberlDecember 1998 [Vol. 92(No. 2)]
93
engaged in group tasks, and 12% of episodes occurred when children were engaged in teacher-led tasks. The results suggest that children are bullying and being disrup- tive in the classroom when they are not with the teacher. Therefore, aggressive children may need consistent and per- sistent teacher supervision, support, and monitoring to remain on task and to refrain from disrupting others in the classroom.
Discussion
This research is a descriptive study of the prevalence and nature of bullying behavior in the classroom. On the basis of a systemic-developmental framework, we examined the individual characteristics of bullies and victims. dyadic interactional features, and social ecological factors related to bullying and victimization. The results of the present study indicate that (a) bullying is pervasive in the classroom, (b) teachers are generally unaware of bullying, and (c) the peer group is reluctant to intervene to stop bullying. The results of the present study are discussed in terms of the sys- temic-developmental framework and intervention approach- es for dealing with bullying problems in the school milieu.
According to the systemic-developmental model, bully- ing is an interaction between an individual bully and victim that unfolds in a social context.A recognition of individual characteristics of bullies and victims is important in expanding our understanding of bullying interactions. From the individual perspective, we assessed gender differences associated with the frequency of bullying. In the classroom observations, boys and girls were equally likely to bully. That finding is contrary to research from self- and teacher reports that reveals that boys are more likely to bully than girls (Olweus, 1978, 1991, 1993;Roland, 1989;Stephenson & Smith, 1989).Inthe Toronto Board of Education survey, 23% of male students and only 8% of female students acknowledged that they had bullied other students more than once or twice per semester (Ziegler & Pepler, 1993). The finding of the present study is consistent with similar observational research of bullying on the playground where no gender differences were observed (Craig, 1993).
In our classroom observations, boys were observed as vic- tims more frequently than girls were. That gender difference is consistent with some research (Olweus, 1991, 1993; Rigby & Slee, 1991;Stephenson& Smith, 1989),but incon- sistent with the Toronto Board of Education survey in which equal numbers of boys and girls reported being victimized (Ziegler & Pepler, 1993).The observational data need to be interpreted with caution because the proportion of time spent filming boys was greater than that for girls and, therefore, boys may be overrepresented as both bullies and victims.
The second individual characteristicassessed in the pres- ent study was aggressiveness. In our classroom observa- tions, aggressiveness and bullying behavior were associat- ed-aggressive children were more likely to bully than nonaggressive children. That finding is consistent with
other research (Olweus, 1987, 1993; Stephenson & Smith, 1989). Olweus (1978) described bullies as having an aggressive personality pattern that predisposes them to respond aggressively. By bullying, those children use their aggression to assert power and dominance. Involvement in bullying raises concerns for the long-term perspectives for bullies. Aggression and antisocial behavior is relatively sta- ble over time (Huesmann, Eron, Lefiowitz, & Walder, 1984; Loeber, 1982). Similar to other aggressive children, bullies may be at risk for school failure (Patterson, 1986; Patterson, Debaryshe, & Ramsey, 1989), maladjustment, and criminal behavior (Huesmann et al., 1984; Olweus, 1991). An examination of the continuity between adoles- cent and adult bullying revealed that bullying at age 14 pre- dicts bullying at age 32 (Famngton, 1993).Olweus (1991), in a follow-up study of school bullies, found that 60% of boys identified as bullies in Grades 6-9 had at least one criminal conviction by age 24. Thirty-five to 40% of the school-aged bullies had three or more court convictions by age 24, compared with 10% of the control children
(Olweus, 1991).
In the present study, equal numbers of aggressive and
nonaggressive children were observed as victims in the classroom. The heterogeneous group of victims is consis- tent with other studies (Olweus, 1991; Stephenson & Smith, 1989).The results of the present study highlight the differ- ent subgroups of victims. Stereotypically, victims are depicted as passive and weak children who acquiesce to an aggressor’s demands and display signs of vulnerability by crying or withdrawing (Olweus, 1978; Patterson, Littman, & Bricker, 1967; Perry et a]., 1988); however, victims can also be aggressive. Olweus (1991) made a distinction between passive and provocative victims. Provocative vic- tims differ from passive victims in that they usually provoke an attack, are easily provoked, may retaliate when attacked, and often complain about being attacked (Olweus, 1993; Perry et al.; Stephenson & Smith, 1989). Perry et al. made a similar distinction between low-aggressive and high-aggres- sive victims; some highly victimized children were nominat- ed as the most aggressive children, whereas other highly vic- timized children were never nominated as behaving aggressively.
In the present classroom observations, 1 1 of the 17 chil- dren observed as victims were also observed as bullies. The dynamics of victimization may be very different for victims and bully-victims. The results of the present study support the current intervention strategy of identifying bullies and victims in the early school years to provide opportunities for prevention and intervention of problems associated with bullying and victimization at school (e.g., Pepler, Craig, Ziegler, & Charach, 1993; Sharp, Arora, Smith, & Whitney,
1994).The present study indicates that some children may be at greater risk for involvement in bullying and victimiza- tion. Schools must be proactive in identifying those children and supporting their educational progress and social and emotional development. To date, a number of question-
 94
The Journal of Educational Research
naires have been designed that are useful for the identifica- tion of children at risk for bullying and victimization (e.g., Garrity, Jens, Porter, Sager, & Short-Camilli, 1994; Olweus,
1989; Pepler et al., 1993; Sharp et al., 1994).
The second variable within the systemic-developmental model that must be considered is the dyadic interactional
features that influence bullying interactions. Assessment of the dyadic interactional features of bullying revealed the expected power differential. When it was possible to code differential height and weight, bullies in the classroom were often rated as taller and heavier than their victims, which is consistent with research indicating that bullies are physical- ly strong (i.e., big), whereas victims are physically weak and thin (Olweus, 1991; Stephenson & Smith, 1989). Those findings support the notion of a power imbalance between the bully and the victim. The results should be interpreted cautiously given that a large proportion of episodes involved indirect bullying in which the victim was not in the camera frame and thereby height and weight differential could not be determined. It is important to realize that the power imbalance in bullying may not be limited to physical size. It may be manifested in the tone of voice, physical stance of the bully, or the number of children engaged as bullies. In addition, the power differential may derive from the support of peers who are involved in the majority of epi- sodes in the classroom. Although it is often difficult for teachers to recognize those involved in bullying (given the covertness of the behavior), the results of the present study suggest that adults may play an important role by shifting the power away from the bully and supporting the victim. It is important to recognize that victimized children cannot solve bullying conflicts alone. Children who are victimized have trouble defending themselves (Olweus, 1991, 1993; Besag, 1989) and need adults to intervene. By intervening in bullying conflicts, adults shift the power away from the bully.
The systemic-developmental model points to the impor- tance of children’s interactions with others. Peer and teacher involvement in bullying interactions highlight the social ecological factors that influence bullying behavior at school. In the present study, we examined the role of peers and teachers in bullying episodes in the classroom. Peers, in the classroom context, were present in the majority of bul- lying episodes. Peer group processes play an important role in supporting bullying behavior in the classroom. Olweus ( 1993) highlighted four processes that may influence peers’ behavior in bullying interactions: modeling and reinforce- ment, social contagion, diffusion of responsibility, and social reputation of bullies and victims. Bullying interac- tions are not only influenced by the peer context, but bully- ing also has consequences for the peer group (Olweus,
1993;Tattum, 1989;Ziegler & Pepler, 1993).It is important to consider the consequences that witnessing bullying has for peers in the classroom. Peers who witness bullying con- flicts may also be at risk because watching aggressive con- flicts may lead to discomfort and anxiety (El-Sheik, Cum- mings, & Goetch, 1989; Tattum, 1989; Ziegler & Pepler).
Further, peers may be drawn into the interaction for fear of being the next victim (Olweus, 1978, 1993; Tattum, 1989). Researchers should examine peer group dynamics and processes in reinforcing and maintaining bullying and the consequences that bullying has on the social and academic development of peers in the classroom.
In the present study, peers often were present during bul- lying episodes, but they rarely intervened to stop the bully- ing. Lack of peer intervention in bullying episodes may reflect peers’ absence of strategies rather than an attitude of apathy. Children may not intervene to stop bullying because they are unsure how to help. In the Toronto survey, 33% of the students reported that they did nothing, but thought they should do something (Pepler et al., 1994; Ziegler & Pepler, 1993). Alternatively, peers may be staying on task in the classroom and therefore refraining from intervening in bul- lying episodes. Also, children may hesitate to report bully- ing if they are not confident about gaining teacher support (Besag, 1989). Nineteen percent of students in the Toronto survey indicated that teachers “almost never intervened,” whereas less than half of the victims of bullying indicated that they had told a teacher about the incident (Ziegler & Pepler). Many current interventions emphasize that students need to feel that it is safe to tell teachers and be assured that teachers will follow up the report and intervene (Craig & Pepler, 1996; Olweus, 1993; Sharp & Smith, 1993).
On the basis of a systemic-developmental model, teach- ers may play a role in the nature and prevalence of bullying interactions in the classroom. In the present study, teachers intervened in I I (18%) of the 60 bullying episodes in the classroom. When teachers were judged to be aware of bul- lying, they were more likely to intervene in bullying episodes. Nevertheless, teachers did not consistently inter- vene in bullying episodes during the classroom observa- tions. The results suggest that when teachers are aware of bullying in the classroom they tend to intervene, but often they are not aware of the covert activity. Teachers’ lack of awareness is consistent with survey data in which there is a discrepancy between teacher and student reports. In the Toronto survey, 7 I % of teachers and only 25% of students indicated that teachers almost always intervened to stop bullying (Ziegler & Pepler, 1993).That discrepancy reflects the fact that peers are present (actively participating or pas- sively watching) during the majority of bullying episodes, whereas teachers are in close proximity in only a small number of bullying episodes. Teachers’ lack of awareness reflects the covert nature of bullying behavior: Students bully when teachers are not there to see it. Teachers need to develop an awareness of the complexity of the problem in order to identify bullying in their classrooms. This enables them to be more vigilant and responsive to bullying prob- lems which, in turn, may give children more confidence to seek teachers’ assistance when bullying occurs.
Although peers were more frequently involved in bullying episodes than teachers were, only a small number of peers who witnessed the interaction intervened on the victim’s
 NovembedDecember 1998 [Vol. 92(No. 2)]
95
behalf. Peers intervened less frequently than teachers did. Teachers may be more inclined to intervene because they per- ceive classroom management as their responsibility. Peers do not seem to be inclined to help when another peer is being taunted in the classroom. The present study suggests that in addition to being part of the problem, peers are also part of the solution. From a systemic-developmental perspective, intervention approaches must also incorporate peers.
Findings from the present study indicate that peers are often aware of bullying, provide an audience for it, but do not intervene. Therefore, interventions to reduce bullying prob- lems should not be limited to children who are at high risk for involvement in bullying problems, but should comprise a preventive agenda aimed at all students. A component of the intervention must be aimed at peers in several ways. First, schools must strive to increase children’s sensitivity to vic- timized children and cultivate an ethos of peer support. Rigby andSlee(199I)examinedtheattitudesamongAustralianstu- dents toward victimized children. The majority of children were supportive of victims, but there was a developmental trend whereby sympathy for the victims decreased with age (Rigby & Slee). That trend suggests that an early intervention aimed at developing student attitudes against bullying and against viewing the victim negatively may be an effective approach to the prevention of bullying in schools. Through classroom activities such as role play, story telling, and drama, students may develop an awareness of the perspective of the victim (Cowie & Sharp, 1994; Pepler, Craig, & Ziegler et al., 1993). When students begin to experience the role of victim, they may begin to empathize and support the victims (Pepler,Craig,&Ziegleretal., 1993).
The second approach for intervention with peers involves lessons on the definition of bullying, providing strategies, and a language or script for intervening. Providing children with a language to stop bullying empowers children to use their voices and to take action against bullying. Within the Norwegian intervention, Olweus (199 1) outlined three class rules against bullying for peers to follow: “We shall not bully other students, we shall try to help students who are being bullied, and we shall make a point to include students who become easily left out” (p. 445). (In Norway, a nationwide intervention program to reduce bullying incidents in schools included student lessons on the definition of bully- ing behavior.) Pepler et al. (1993) suggested that peers should be made aware of how they may inadvertently sup- port bullying by joining in or by not intervening to stop bul- lying. With an increased understanding of how peers are part of the problem of bullying, they may be likely to inter- vene (Pepler, Craig, & Ziegler et al., 1993).
On the basis of the systemic-developmental model, we examined the structure of the classroom, the context in which bullying unfolds. Examination of the social context in which bullying occurs highlights the role of ecological factors in bullying interactions. In the classroom observa- tions, bullying most frequently occurred when children were involved in solitary activities. As expected, bullying
was less likely to take place in front of the teacher. The structure of the classroom has been shown to influence chil- dren’s behavior (Housten-Stein et al., 1977). Classroom observations of a Head Start program revealed that children in less structured classrooms (i.e., less student-teacher interaction or less teacher directive) tend to be more aggres- sive than children in highly structured classrooms (Housten-Stein et al.). The classroom context interacts with individual child characteristics. Some children may be more likely to engage in off-task and disruptive behavior than other children when not directly supervised by the teacher (Coie & Dodge, 1988). In the classroom, aggressive chil- dren may need considerable teacher support to remain on task and to learn. Aggressive children have been observed engaging in more off-task behavior and requiring more teacher attention than nonaggressive children (Roberts, Pepler, & Craig, 1998). Bullying interactions may interfere with learning for bullies, victims, and peers. The bully is off task and disruptive, and, therefore, not available for the task of learning. As a result, bullies may not develop adequate academic skills and may experience academic failure (Pat- terson, 1986). The victim may be anxious and fearful, there- by unable to attend to academic tasks. In the present study, aggressive children were more likely to bully than nonag- gressive children. Also, bullying was likely to occur when aggressive children were not interacting with the teacher or under close supervision.
Aggressive children may not possess the academic or attentional skills to apply themselves successfully to work and learn independently in the classroom (Patterson et al.,
1989). Those children are likely to engage in bullying, which may interfere with their academic progress and that of their peers. The results of the present study suggest that classroom structure (teacher-direction) may play an impor- tant role in providing opportunity for individual children to engage in bullying behavior. That finding has implications for classroom and lesson planning. Other classroom factors, not assessed in this study, may influence bullying behavior in that context (e.g., teacher philosophy, multiage class- rooms). Mooij ( 1993) suggested that differential classroom instructional processes may increase the likelihood of bul- lying interactions in the classroom setting. Students tend to be influenced by teachers’ instructional and management strategies (Mooij). Future research assessing bullying beha- vior in different classroom settings may provide additional insight into the nature of bullying in that context.
To summarize, our observations of bullying interactions in the classroom highlight the challenges for school staff to identify and respond to bullying. We recognize the difficul- ty for teachers to monitor a large group of students; more- over, there are also certain features of bullying that make it difficult to identify. First, bullying episodes in the class- room are brief. Second, bullying is most likely to occur when students are involved in solitary tasks, not directly in front of the teacher during teacher-led tasks. Third, teachers may not be aware of bullying conflicts because of children’s
 96
The Journal of Educational Research
(victims and witnesses) reluctance to report incidents to teachers (Smith, 1991;Yates & Smith, 1989).Finally, in this study, the majority of bullying in the classroom was verbal. Because verbal bullying can be done quietly and covertly, children are able to avoid detection and punishment.
Bullying is usually associated with direct and physical attacks (Craig, 1993; Olweus, 1991); however, the findings of this observational study suggest that in the classroom verbal displays of bullying are more common than physical displays. The covert nature of bullying compounds teach- ers’ difficulty to detect bullying. Teachers are unlikely to hear whispered attacks, threats, or harassment even when the noise level of the classroom is held to a minimum. In our study, classroom bullying involved both direct verbal attacks and indirect gossip and exclusion. That is consistent with children’s reports of being victims of gossip in junior and secondary schools (Whitney & Smith, 1993). The use of remote microphones in this study allowed us to observe some gossip and social exclusionary behaviors both at their inception and after the effect was recognized. Teachers are often not afforded this opportunity. In the present study, however, that type of bullying may have been underrepre- sented because the instigator may have remained anony- mous from the researcher as well. The challenges of detect- ing bullying in the classroom suggest that raising teachers’ awareness about bullying may be important to increase the frequency of teacher intervention in bullying interactions. Raising teacher awareness, however, is only part of the solution to reducing bullying problems. Findings from the present study indicate that bullying problems in schools are determined by multiple factors: individual differences, dyadic features of the interaction between the bully and the victim, and social ecological variables. Therefore, schools must adopt a systemic perspective for prevention and inter- vention of bullying problems.
Research indicates that a systemic approach to interven- tion in bullying is effective in reducing bullying (e.g., Olweus, 1991; Pepler et al., 1994). A comprehensive sys- temic approach to intervention in bullying should be direct- ed at the community and family, school, classroom, teacher, and student (Mooij, 1993; Sharp & Smith, 1993; Pepler, Craig, & Ziegler et al., 1993;Tattum, 1993).Olweus (1991) reported a 50% reduction in bullying in Norwegian schools over 2 years as a result of a nationwide intervention pro- gram. Within the Toronto intervention project, children’s reports of being bullied were reduced up to 50% over 2 years (Pepler & Atlas, 1996). In addition, at one school in which a systemic approach was implemented, there was a 50% reduction in the observed frequency of aggression on the playground and in the classroom after a 30-month peri- od (Pepler & Atlas). In the present study, we highlight the importance of a systemic approach for intervention in bul- lying problems by outlining a number of different variables that influence bullying behavior in the classroom.
Using our research, we believe that bullying in schools represents part of the larger problem of violence in our soci-
ety. The pervasiveness of bullying in schools may reflect the institutionalizationof bullying behavior (Askew, 1989).On the basis of research in boys’ schools, Askew suggested that values of a school often reflect the values of the larger soci- ety, which in some schools may support traditional stereo- types of masculinity and competitiveness. Reducing vio- lence in schools requires a whole curriculum approach in which students are encouraged to work together coopera- tively and to solve conflicts constructively (Cowie & Sharp, 1994). Deutsch (1993) outlined a curriculum program for educating children based on a philosophy that facilitates cooperative, interdependent learning and constructive con- flict resolution. Herbert ( 1993) purported that the combina- tion of a cognitive and affective curriculum is of critical importance in providing a safe environment in which stu- dents can learn. The primary aim of an affective curriculum is to foster the social and personal development of individual students (Herbert). An affective or antibullying curriculum can change students’ attitude about bullying and increase helping and empathic behavior (Pepler, Craig, & Ziegler et al., 1993). That can be achieved through drama activities and role play aimed at introducing a language for interven- tion, raising empathy, and increasing sensitivity toward vic- timized children (Pepler, Craig, & Ziegler et al., 1993).
The present study must be considered in the context of its limitations. First, a small sample was used in this study. Second, participants were observed only in the classroom of one school, which limits generalizability because school climate or classroom climate may be related to bullying problems (Stephenson & Smith, 1989). For example, schools that have a clear policy against bullying appear to have a lower incidence of bullying problems (Stephenson & Smith). School climate data were not available; therefore, the extent to which school climate influenced bullying problems in the present study could not be addressed.
To conclude, the present study comprises a preliminary investigation of bullying in the classroom with a method that provides access to a world usually not privy to adults. Observations of naturally occurring bullying interactions are an effective method for investigating and understanding bullying in the classroom. Future research should incorpo- rate the use of naturalistic observations and self- and teacher reports to gain a broader understanding of the phe- nomenon of bullying. A comprehensive account of the dynamics of bullying interactions and ecological variables related to bullying can strengthen the efforts to reduce such problems. One must recognize the seriousness of bullying in the school milieu because children who are involved in bullying conflicts may be at risk for future maladjustment. Providing a safe environment will cultivate a positive atmosphere for learning and set the stage for encouraging and fostering further development.
NOTES
This research was supported by a grant from the Ontario Mental Health Foundation.
 November/December 1998 [Vol. 92(No. 2)]
97
We thank the City of York School Board and the teachers and children who participated in this research. We are also grateful to Wendy Craig, Susan Koschmider, Diane Maubach, Paul O'Connell, Phillip Viviani, and Sandra D'Souza for their assistance.
REFERENCES
Asher, S. R., & Gabriel, S. W. (1993). Using a wireless transmission sys- tem to observe conversation and social interaction on the playground. In C. H. Hart (Ed.), Children on playgrounds: Research per.spectives and applications (pp. 184-209). Albany, N Y SUNY Press.
Askew, S. (1989). Aggressive behavior in boys: To what extent is it insti- tutionalized? In D. Tattum & D. Lane (Eds.), Bullying in schools (pp. 59-72), Stoke-on-Trent: Trenton Books.
Besag, V. E. (1989). Bullying and victimization in schools. Milton Keynes, PA: Open University Press.
Bjorkqvist, K., Lagerspetz, M. J., & Kaukianinen, A. (1992). Do girls manipulate and boys fight?: Developmental trends in regard to direct and indirect aggression. Aggressive Behavior. 18, 117-1 27.
Bjorkqvist, K., Osterman, K., & Kaukianinen, A. (1992). The development of direct and indirect aggressive strategies in males and females. In K. Bjorkqvist & P. Niernela (Eds.), Of mice and women: Aspects of female aggression (pp. 51-64). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Cairns, R. B., & Cairns, B. D. (1991). Social cognition and social net- works: A developmental perspective. In D. Pepler & K. Rubin (Eds.). The development and treatment of childhood aggression (pp. 249-278). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Coie, J. D., & Dodge, K. A. (1988). Multiple sources of data on social behavior and social status in the school: A cross age comparison. Child Development, 59, 815-829.
Coie. J. D., & Jacobs, M. R. (1993). The role of social context in the pre- vention of conduct disorder. Development and Psychopathology, 5, 263-275.
Cowie. H., & Sharp, S. (1994). Tackling bullying through the curriculum. In P. Smith & S. Sharp (Eds.), School bull.ving: Insights andperspectives (pp. 84-107). London: Routledge.
Craig, W. (1993). Naturalisti playground. Unpublished d
Craig, W., & Pepler, D. J. (1996). Bullying and victimization at school: What can we do about it? In S. Miller, J. Brodine, & T. Miller (Eds.), Planning .forpeaceful school communities (pp. 205-230). Seattle, WA: Committee for Children.
Craig, W., & Pepler, D. J. (1997). Naturalistic observations of bullying in the school yard. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Crick, N. R.. & Grotpeter, J. K. (1995). Relational aggression, gender, and social-psychological adjustment. Child Development,66.710-722.
DeRosier, M. E., Cillessen. A. H., Coie, J. D., & Dodge, K. (1994). Group context and children's aggressive behaviour. Child Development, 65,
1068-1079.
Deutsch. M. (1993). Educating for a peaceful world. American Psycholo-
gist, 48, 510-517.
El-Sheik, M., Cummings, E. H., & Goetch, V. L. (1989). Coping with
adults' angry behaviour: Behavioural, physiological and verbal respons-
es in preschoolers. Developmental Psychology, 25, 49W98. Farrington. D. P. (1991). Childhood aggression and adult violence: Early precursors and later life outcomes. In D. Pepler & K. Rubin (Eds.), The development and treatment of childhood aggression (pp. 5-29). Hills-
dale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Farrington, D. P. (1993). Understanding and preventing bullying. In M.
Tonry and N. Morris (Eds.), Crime and justice (Vol. 17). Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press.
Garrity, C., Jens. K., Porter. W., Sager, N., & Short-Camilli, C. (1994).
Bul!v-proojing your school: A comprehensive approachfor elementary
schools. Longmont, CO: Sopris West.
Hartup, W. W. (1983). Peer relations. In E. M. Hetherington (Ed.) & P. H.
Mussen (Series Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 4. Socializa- tion. personality, and social development (pp. 103-196). New York: Wiley.
Herbert, G. (1993). Changing children's attitudes through the curriculum. In D. Tattum (Ed.), Understanding and managing bullying (pp. 92-103). Oxford: Heinenmann Educational.
Houston-Stein, A.. Friedrich-Cofer, L., & Susman, E. J. (1977). The rela- tion of classroom structure to social behavior, imaginative play, self reg-
ulation of economically disadvantaged children. Child Development, 48,
908-9 16.
Huesmann, R. L.. Eron, L. D., Lefkowitz, M. M.. & Walder, L. 0 . (1984).
Stability of aggression over time and generations. Developmental Psv-
ChoIogy, 20, I 120-1 134.
Hyde, J. S. (1984). How large are gender differences in aggression? A
developmental meta-analysis. Developmental Psychology, 20, 722-736. Lagerspetz, K. M., Bjorkqvist, K., & Peltonen, T. (1988). Is indirect aggression typical of females? Gender difference in aggressiveness in
11- to 12-year-old children. Aggressive Behavior, 14. 403414.
Loeber, R. (1982). The stability of antisocial and delinquent behavior: A
review. Child Development. 53, 1431-1446.
Maccoby, E. E., & Jacklin, C. N. (1974). The psychology of sex di'erences.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Mooij, T. (1993). Working towards understanding and prevention in the
Netherlands. In D. Tattum (Ed.), Understanding and managing bullying
(pp. 3143). Oxford: Heinenmann Educational.
Olweus, D. (1978). Aggression in the schools: Bullies and whipping boys.
New York: Wiley.
Olweus, D. (1987). Schoolyard bullying-grounds
for intervention. School
Safety, 6,4-I 1.
Olweus, D. (1989). A questionnaire for students (junior and senior ver-
sions). Unpublished manuscript,
Olweus, D. (1991). Bullylvictim problems among school children: Some
basic facts and effects of a school based intervention program. In D. Pepler & K. Rubin (Eds.), The development and treatment of childhood aggression (pp. 411-448). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Olweus. D. (1993). Bullies on the playground: The role of victimization. In C. Hart (Ed.)C,hildren on the playground: Research perspectives and applications (pp. 85-128). New York: SUNY Press.
Patterson, G. R. (1986). Performance models for antisocial boys. American Psychologist. 41, 432-444.
Patterson, G . R., Debaryshe, B. D., & Ramsey, E. (1989). A developmen- tal perspective on antisocial behavior. American Psychologist, 44, 329-335.
Patterson, G. R., Littman. R. A,, & Bricker, W. (1967).Assertive behaviour in children: A step toward a theory of aggression. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 32 (Serial No. 113).
Pepler, D. J., & Atlas, R. S. (1996, May). Evaluation of an antibullying intervention in Toronto schools. Paper presented at the University of Waterloo Conference in Child Development, Waterloo, Ontario.
Pepler, D. J., & Craig. W. M. (1995). A peek behind the fence: Naturalis- tic observations of aggressive children with remote audiovisual record- ing. Developmental Psychology, 31, 548-553.
Pepler, D. J.. Craig, W. M., & Roberts, W. R. (1998). Observations of aggressive and nonaggressive children on the school playground. Mer- rill Palmer Quarterly, 44, 55-76.
Pepler, D. J., Craig, W. M., Ziegler, S., & Charach, A. (1993). A school- based anti-bullying intervention: Preliminary evaluation. In D. Tattum (Ed.), Understanding and managing bullying (pp. 76-9 I). Oxford: Heinenmann Educational.
Pepler, D. J.. Craig, W. M.. Ziegler, S., & Charach, A. (1994). An evalua- tion of an anti-bullying intervention in Toronto schools. Canadian Jour- nal of Community Mental Health, 13. 95-1 10.
Perry, D., Kusel. S., & Perry, L. (1988). Victims of peer aggression. Devel- opmental Psychology, 24, 807-8 14.
Rigby, K., & Slee, P. T. (1991). Bullying among Australian school chil- dren: Reported behaviour and attitudes toward victims. Journal of Social Psychology, 131. 615-627.
Roberts, B., Pepler, D. I., & Craig, W. M. (1998). Classroom observations of aggressive and nonaggressive children. Unpublished manuscript.
Roland, E. (1989). Bullying: The Scandinavian research tradition. In D. Tattum & D. Lane (Eds.). Bullying in schools (pp. 21-32). Stoke-on- Trent: Trentham Books.
Scott, W. A. (1955). Reliability of content analysis: The case of the nomi- nal scale coding. Public Opinion Quarterly, 19, 321-325.
Serbin, L. A,, Marchessault, K.. McAffer, V., Peters, P., & Schwartzman, A. E. (1993). Patterns of social behavior on the playground in 9- to I I- year-old girls and boys: Relation to teacher perceptions and to peer rat- ings of aggression. withdrawal, and likability. In C. H. Hart (Ed.), Chil- dren on playgrounds: Research perspectives and applications (pp. 162-183). Albany, N Y SUNY Press.
Sharp, S., Arora, T.. Smith, P. K., & Whitney. 1. (1994). How to measure bullying in your school. In S. Sharp & P. K. Smith (Eds.), Tackling bul-
 98
The Journal of Educational Research
lyinginyourschool:Apracticalhandbookforteachers(pp.7-22). Lon-
don: Routledge.
Sharp, S., & Smith, P. (1993). Tackling bullying: The Shefield Project. In
D. Tattum (Ed.), Understanding and managing bullying (pp. 45-55).
Oxford: Heinenmann Educational.
Smith, P. K. (1991). The silent nightmare: Bullying and victimization in
school peer groups. The Psychologist. 4, 243-248.
Smith, P. K., &Thompson, D. (1991). Dealing with bullylvictim problems
in the U.K. In P. K. Smith & D. Thompson (Eds.), Practical approach-
es to bullying (pp. 1-12). London: David Foulton.
Stephenson, P., & Smith, D. (1989). Bullying in the iunior school. In D.
Tattum & D. Lane (Eds.), Bullying in ;chools (pp. 45-58). Stoke-on- Trent: Trentham Books.
Tattum,D.(1989).Violenceandaggressioninschools.InD.Tattum&D. Lane (Eds.), Bullying in schools (pp. 7-20). Stoke-on-Trent: Trentham Books.
Tattum, D. (1993). What is bullying? In D. Tattum (Ed.), Understanding and managing bullying (pp. 3-14). Oxford: Heinemann Educational. Whitney, I., & Smith, P. (1993). A survey of the nature and extent of bul-
lying in juniorlmiddle and secondary schools. Educational Research,
35, 3-25.
Yates, C., & Smith, P. (1989). Bullying in two English comprehensive
schools. In E. Roland & E. Munthe (Eds.), Bullying: An international
perspective (PP.22-34). London: David Fulton.
Zieglei, S., & Pepler, D. J. (1993). Bullying at school: Pervasive and per-
sistent. Orbit, 24. 29-3 1.
Coding Definitions
“A person is being bullied when he or she is exposed, repeatedly and over time, to negative actions on the part of one or more persons.” (Olweus, 1991. p. 41 1)
It is not within the parameters of the present study to examine the repeat- ed nature of bullying behavior.
Bullying is defined as a form of social interaction in which there is an implied imbalance of power or strength in the interaction. Bullies are always more powerful than victims. The victim has difficulty defending himself or herself against the person(s) who is harassing. This power imbalance may be demonstrated through physical size, physical stance, tone of voice, or the number of children. In some cases, more than one child may bully another child.
Negative actions refer to behavior that is intended to inflict harm, injury, pain, or discomfort upon another individual. Negative actions can have both a physical and verbal component and can manifest itself in physical attacks or verbal contact or gesture (i.e., making faces or rude gestures).
Negative intent is difficult to quantify because we cannot see what one is thinking. However, negative intent may be exhibited through facial expression of verbalizations of intent.
Type of bullying: Direct and indirect. Direct bullying involves open attacks on the victim and may be either verbal or physical. Indirect bul- lying is less visible and more subtle than direct bullying. It is also nega- tive actions in an asymmetrical power relationship but takes the form of social isolation, exclusion, and ostracism from a group. Another form of indirect bullying is aggression directed toward a victim who is not pres- ent. An example is gossip.
Type of aggression: Physical and verbal. Physical aggression involves hitting, kicking, spitting on, pushing or shoving, and threatening ges- tures. Verbal attacks refer to teasing, name calling, taunting, and gossip.
Bully: The person(s) who initiates the aggressive action. The bullying interaction is not one of mutuality. The aggressive behavior is not invited by both parties involved in the interaction.
Victim: The person(s) who is subjected to the aggressive actions (physi- cal or verbal) of another more dominant individual. A more dominant individual is defined by the power differential that is determined by such things as differential size, tone of voice, stance, or demeanour.
Peer active involvement:Children who join in the episode physically or verbally abusing the victim. Examples include hitting victim, laughing at bully’s actions, and verbal insults. They are drawn into the episode but do not initiate the attack nor share equally in the responsibility. Examples are children who laugh while a victim is humiliated and kick a child while the bully is beating him or her up.
Peer in joint activity: Peers who are not actively involved in the bully- ing but are involved in the episode as a result of their interaction with either the bully or the victim. An example is children playing a game with the victim when he or she is bullied. Whether aware or unaware, peers in joint activity are considered part of the episode. Indicate if the peers in joint activity are aware or unaware of the bullying episode.
Peer onlooker: A child who is not involved in any way with bully, vic- tim, or activity. Onlookers are in close proximity and clearly watching the episode for a minimum of 5 s. They can begin to watch at any time dur- ing the episode but must sustain an interest for a minimum of 5 s.
Peer in parallel activity: Children who are in close proximity to anoth- er child or children and engaged in similar activities. However, there is little if no active interaction between the target child and the other chil- dren around him or her.
Peer intervener:A peer who attempts to help the victim either by phys- ically or verbally terminating the bully-victim interaction in a prosocial manner. The peer may or may not be successful in the attempt; this is documented as either effective or ineffective.
Teacher-led activities: Situations in which the teacher uses a directive approach and plays an active role in engaging the students in constructive activities. An example of teacher-led tasks would be when the students sit in front of the teacher or when the teacher interacts with the children (indi- vidually or in a group) giving instructions about a particular activity.
Solitary activities:Children who engage in constructive activities alone. These children work in close proximity with other children but do not engage them. This is a nondirective method in which children select activities and move freely about the classroom.
Group activities: Children (two or more) who are actively working together on a task. These children are interacting with each other. Group classroom tasks are categorized between the two extremes of the types of structured classrooms.
APPENDIX A
Definitions and Criteria for Coding Bullying Episodes
 Novemberrnecember 1998 [Vol. 92(No. 2)]
99
Episode 1
Duration: 227 s
Qpe of aggression: Verbal and physical Qpe of bullying: Direct and indirect Learning activity: Solitary task
In the following bullying episode there was I female bully, 2 female peers in parallel activity, and 1 female victim.
Three of the 4 girls were working at a table and the fourth (the victim) joins them at the table. As the 4th girl comes to the table, the episode begins.
Bully: I can’t wait until recess.
Victim: Why‘?
Bully: Because I hate you, and I am going to beat you up.
(The victim leaves the tdbk and threatens to tell the teacher.)
Bully: Tell her, I don’t care.
Peer 1: Do you really hate her?
Bully: Yes.
Peer 1: How can you?
Bully: I hate her guts!
(The victim walks back to the table. The bully stands up and chases the victim away.)
Peer I: You said it was okay, so she said it. . . . I’m not getting into this fight.
Bully: I don’t care. I can’t wait until it is recess. man.
Peer 1: If you kick her, you’ll get in trouble.
Bully: No, 1won’t. I’ll just kick her right up in her face.
Bully: (To someone offscreen): Do you want to help me beat up ?-
Peer 1: If you guys beat her up, you guys are going to get into all the trouble. (It is announced that it is going to be indoor recess.)
Peer 1: I’m glad it’s indoor recess.
Bully: Why?
PeerI:Because,~-ismyfriend,and1don’twanthertogethurt.
The victim comes back to the table. The bully leans over the table and tries to hit her and then gets up and chases her away from the table.
Peer 1: Leave her alone.
Eventually the victim and Peer I tell the teacher, and the teacher tells
~~
APPENDIX B
A Glimpsezit BullyingInteractionsin the Classroom
them not to worry because if-
Episode 2
Duration: 40 s
Type of aggression: Physical Type of bullying: Direct Learning activity: Solitary task
hurts them. she will get in trouble.
In the following episode there was I male bully, I male victim, and 2 peer onlookers. The bully walks by another table and writes on another boy’s work.
Bully: What is that you’re writing? (He slams his hand on the table and tries to pull the pencil out of the boy’s hand.)
Victim: No.
(The bully goes and sits down at his table.) Victim: (to the bully) I’m not angry at you. (The bully walks back over to the boy’s table.)
Bully: I’ll mark it (and he writes in the boy’s notebook). I’m going to go like this. 1touch it.
Teacher: Oh, it’s only a tiny mark. (The victim walks back to his seat.) Peer 1: Let me see.
(The victim shows her his notebook.)
__ what _ _ _ did to my work.
Victim: No. Miss
(the victim goes to show the teacher). Look

