Self-reported Violence-related Outcomes for Adolescents Within Eight Weeks of Emergency Department Treatment for Assault InjuryAbstractPurposeTo estimate, using a novel interactive voice response (IVR) survey, the incidence of self-reported violence-related experiences of adolescent assault-injured patients in the weeks after discharge from the emergency department (ED).MethodsIn an urban ED, a prospective cohort study with 8-week follow-up IVR survey either weekly, bi-weekly, or monthly after discharge was conducted with patients aged 12–19 years presenting with assault-related injuries. Survival analysis methods were used to estimate cumulative risks of self-reported violence experienced within 4 and 8 weeks.ResultsA total of 95 patients were enrolled; 42 (44.2%) reported to the IVR survey. As a result of the ED index event, an estimated 18.2% (confidence interval [CI] = 9.1%–34.6%) reported being assaulted (no weapon), 2.9% (CI = .4%–19.1%) had been shot or stabbed, 20.7% (CI = 10.9%–37.3%) had assaulted someone else (no weapon), and 2.9% (CI = .4%–19.1%) shot or stabbed someone else. Additionally, 54.6% (CI = 39.6%–70.9%) had avoided going certain places, 47.0% (CI = 32.5%–64.1%) considered retaliating, 38.1% (CI = 24.3%–56.3%) had been threatened, and 27.0% (CI = 15.4%–44.6%) had carried a weapon. Most outcome occurrences happened within 4 weeks. There was evidence that intent to retaliate when asked at baseline was associated with an elevated risk of several outcomes.ConclusionsThe risk for subsequent violence among assault-injured adolescent ED patients appears high within weeks of discharge.Assault-related trauma is a chronic, recurrent disease among adolescents in America. The potential for subsequent violence, heightened fear, and perceived need for weapon carrying may be particularly high among assaulted emergency department (ED) patients [1]. EDs remain an underused resource for identifying adolescents at greatest risk of subsequent injury and providing violence prevention resources [2]. To improve our understanding of risks adolescent patients face and factors that may identify those most needing intervention, we pilot-tested an interactive voice response (IVR) survey as a way to accomplish follow-up research with adolescent assault-injured patients [3]. This article presents results of patients' self-reported violence experiences after discharge from ED.MethodsRecruitment and baseline data collectionA prospective cohort study was conducted by interviewing 12–19-year-old patients treated after interpersonal assault (nonpartner) in the ED of an urban, university-affiliated, tertiary care, pediatric hospital during 2007–2008. Clinically-supervised research assistants conducted enrollment and explained to patients that their motivation was to ultimately help prevent violence and, more immediately, to learn more about violence-related experiences of adolescents in urban environments. Consenting patients were administered a 10-minute questionnaire using validated items [4]. Intent to retaliate was assessed by asking: “Not all fights are over after someone gets hurt. Do you think you will hurt someone because of this fight?”Follow-upFollow-up was accomplished with an IVR survey and by randomly assigning patients to report either weekly, bi-weekly, or monthly, for 8 weeks after discharge from the ED. This follow-up involved calling a toll-free telephone number, keying in a self-chosen access password, and keying Yes/No responses to recorded questions about violence-related experiences since discharge from the ED or since last reporting (published previously [3]).Each patient received a gift card to a local convenience store chain. The card initially contained no value. During follow-up, the IVR system notified a study investigator each time a patient completed a report. Within 48 hours, the investigator electronically wired $5 to the card for each report that was made, with a $10 bonus if all reports were completed by the patient.AnalysisIVR data were analyzed using the product limit method and 95% confidence intervals to estimate the cumulative risk (i.e., 1 minus survival) of each outcome within 4 and 8 weeks of discharge from the ED [5]. Reported outcomes were assumed to have occurred on the date halfway between the report date and the date on which the patient was discharged from the ED or last reported. Stratified analyses evaluated whether a stated intent to retaliate when asked at baseline was associated with a differential risk of outcomes during follow-up. Stratified survival curves were evaluated for equality using the Peto–Peto–Prentice test [6] ;  [7], with differences presented as relative risks by dividing the intent group risk by the no-intent group risk. No power analysis was conducted because this was a feasibility study. The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and a Certificate of Confidential was obtained from the National Institutes of Health.ResultsA total of 773 patients were screened for eligibility, of which 131 were eligible and 95 (72.5%) agreed to participate in the study (Table 1). In all, 42 (44.2%) patients completed a minimum of one IVR report during follow-up and 13.7% completed all requested reports. Details of follow-up have been reported [3].Table 2 reports the estimated 4-week and 8-week cumulative risks of each of the 11 outcomes during follow-up. The 4-week cumulative risk of being threatened, for example, was 30.9% (i.e., an estimated 30.9% had been threatened within 4 weeks) and an estimated 38.1% had been threatened within 8 weeks of discharge. An estimated 18.1% of patients had threatened someone within 4 weeks and 21.5% of patients had threatened someone else, related to the initial event, within 8 weeks. These risk estimates indicate that being threatened and threatening someone were quite common outcomes, and most instances regarding threats occurred within the first 4 weeks after receiving treatment for an assault-related injury. Several other outcomes were common and also occurred most often within 4 weeks.Table 3 shows that among patients who had expressed intent to retaliate during the initial ED interview, the estimated 8-week cumulative risks of threatening someone, carrying a gun or knife, beating up someone, and being beaten up were 53.3%, 48.6%, 31.4%, and 31.3%, respectively. These patients were an estimated 4.9 times more likely to threaten someone during the 8 weeks after discharge as compared with patients not having an intent to retaliate. Large relative risk estimates (i.e., greater than two) suggested evidence that an intent to retaliate was also associated with being more likely to carry a gun or knife, beat up someone, or get beaten up during the weeks after discharge from the ED; however, the null hypothesis of survival curve equality for these outcomes was not rejected.DiscussionThis study found evidence that violence-related experiences among adolescents treated for assault-related injuries are common during the weeks after being discharged from the ED. The results also suggest that simply asking adolescents whether they have a plan to retaliate may help identifying those at particular risk to carry a weapon, threaten someone, assault someone, or be assaulted during coming weeks.Despite the limitations that include risks for reporting bias at baseline and from attrition and nonresponse during follow-up, one study site, a small sample, and using a retaliation intent question having unknown validity and reliability, the research approach used here is compelling and can have advantages over other methods that rely on hospital records to study recidivism [8]. The research approach and remuneration protocol were used based on their success in an earlier study of adult patient victims of intimate partner violence [9]. Additional results regarding feasibility of the present study have been reported [3]. On the basis of those findings and the evidence in the present study that adolescents' risks of violence-related experience after discharge from the ED are high, large-scale studies that use IVR to better understand and potentially test effects of interventions that might be administered to this patient population appear to be warranted. It will be important for those studies to assess the reliability and validity of the IVR method and of questions to assess ED patients' intent to retaliate.