Exposure to physical and sexual violence and adverse health behaviours in African children: results from the Global School-based Student Health SurveyExposure to physical and sexual violence and adverse health behaviours in African children: results from the Global School-based Student Health Survey . Brown, D. W., Riley, L., Butchart, A., Meddings, D. R., Kann, L. & Harvey, A. P. ( 2009 ) Bulletin of the World Health Organization , 87 , 447 – 455 .Objective To examine associations between exposure to physical violence (PV) or sexual violence (SV) and adverse health behaviours among a sample of children in five African countries.Methods In a cross-sectional analysis of data from Namibia, Swaziland, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe – countries that participated in the Global School-based Student Health Survey in 2003 or 2004 – we compared the relative frequency of several adverse health behaviours among children (primarily students 13–15 years of age) who did and who did not report exposure to PV or SV. We estimated odds ratios (ORs) for such behaviours and their 95% confidence intervals (CIs) after adjusting for age and sex.Findings Exposure to PV during the 12 months preceding the survey was reported by 27–50% (average: 42%) of the children studied in the five countries, and lifetime exposure to SV was reported by 9–33% (average: 23%). Moderate to strong associations were observed between exposure to PV or SV and measures of mental health, suicidal ideation, current cigarette use, current alcohol use, lifetime drug use, multiple sex partners and a history of sexually transmitted infection (P≤ 0.05 for all associations). For example, the odds of being a current cigarette smoker were higher in children involved in one fight (OR: 2.20; 95% CI: 1.77–2.75), two to five fights (OR: 3.43; 95% CI: 2.54–4.63) or six fights or more (OR: 5.95; 95% CI: 4.37–8.11) (P for trend <0.001) during the 12 months preceding the survey than in children unexposed to PV.Conclusion Childhood exposure to PV and SV is common among African children in some countries and is associated with multiple adverse health behaviours. In developing countries, increased awareness of the frequency of exposure to violence among children and its potential health consequences may lead to heightened attention to the need for health promotion and preventive programmes that address the problem.Exposure to physical and sexual violence and adverse healthbehaviours in African children: results from the GlobalSchool-based Student Health Survey.Brown, D. W., Riley, L., Butchart, A., Meddings, D. R.,Kann, L. & Harvey, A. P. (2009) Bulletin of the World HealthOrganization, 87, 447–455.Objective To examine associations between exposure tophysical violence (PV) or sexual violence (SV) and adversehealth behaviours among a sample of children in ﬁve Africancountries.Methods In a cross-sectional analysis of data from Namibia,Swaziland, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe – countries thatparticipated in the Global School-based Student Health Surveyin 2003 or 2004 – we compared the relative frequency of severaladverse health behaviours among children (primar ily students13–15 years of age) who did and who did not report exposure toPV or SV. We estimated odds ratios (ORs) for such behavioursand their 95% conﬁdence intervals (CIs) after adjusting for ageand sex.Findings Exposure to PV during the 12 months preceding thesurvey was reported by 27–50% (average: 42%) of the childrenstudied in the ﬁve countries, and lifetime exposure to SV wasreported by 9–33% (average: 23%). Moderate to strong associa-tions were observed between exposure to PV or SV and mea-sures of mental health, suicidal ideation, current cigarette use,current alcohol use, lifetime drug use, multiple sex partners anda history of sexually transmitted infection (P ? 0.05 for allEffect of the Integrated Management of Childhood Illnessstrategy on childhood mortality and nutrition in a rural areain Bangladesh: a cluster randomised trial.Arifeen, S. E., Hoque, D. M. E., Akter, T., Rahman, M.,Hoque, M. E., Begum, K., Chowdhury, E. K., Khan, R.,Blum, L. S., Ahmed, S., Altaf Hossain, M., Siddik, A., Begum,N., Sadeq-ur Rahman, Q., Haque, T. M., Billah, S. M., Islam,M., Rumi, R. A., Law, E., Motin Al-Helal, Z. A., Baqui, A. H.,Schellenberg, J., Adam, T., Moulton, L. H., Habicht, J-P.,Scherpbier, R. W., Victora, C. G., Bryce, J., Black, R. E. (2009)Lancet, 374, 393–403.Background World Health Organization and United NationsInternational Children’s Emergency Fund launched the Inte-grated Management of Childhood Illness (IMCI) strategy inthe mid-1990s to reduce deaths from diarrhoea, pneumonia,malaria, measles, and malnutrition in children younger than 5years. We assessed the effect of IMCI on health and nutrition ofchildren younger than 5 years in Bangladesh.Effect of the Integrated Management of Childhood Illness strategy on childhood mortality and nutrition in a rural area in Bangladesh: a cluster randomised trial. Arifeen, S. E., Hoque, D. M. E., Akter, T., Rahman, M., Hoque, M. E., Begum, K., Chowdhury, E. K., Khan, R., Blum, L. S., Ahmed, S., Altaf Hossain, M., Siddik, A., Begum, N., Sadeq-ur Rahman, Q., Haque, T. M., Billah, S. M., Islam, M., Rumi, R. A., Law, E., Motin Al-Helal, Z. A., Baqui, A. H., Schellenberg, J., Adam, T., Moulton, L. H., Habicht, J-P., Scherpbier, R. W., Victora, C. G., Bryce, J., Black, R. E. (2009) Lancet, 374, 393–403. Background World Health Organization and United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund launched the Integrated Management of Childhood Illness (IMCI) strategy in the mid-1990s to reduce deaths from diarrhoea, pneumonia, malaria, measles, and malnutrition in children younger than 5 years. We assessed the effect of IMCI on health and nutrition of children younger than 5 years in Bangladesh.Methods In this cluster randomized trial, 20 first-level government health facilities in the Matlab subdistrict of Bangladesh and their catchment areas (total population about 350 000) were paired and randomly assigned to either IMCI (intervention; 10 clusters) or usual services (comparison; 10 clusters). All three components of IMCI – healthworker training, healthsystem improvements, and family and community activities – were implemented beginning in February, 2002. Assessment included household and health facility surveys tracking intermediate outputs and outcomes, and nutrition and mortality changes in intervention and comparison areas. Primary endpoint was mortality in children aged between 7 days and 59 months. Analysis was by intention to treat. This study is registered, number ISRCTN52793850. Findings The yearly rate of mortality reduction in children younger than 5 years (excluding deaths in first week of life) was similar in IMCI and comparison areas (8.6% vs. 7.8%). In the last 2 years of the study, the mortality rate was 13.4% lower in IMCI than in comparison areas (95% CI –14.2 to 34.3), corresponding to 4.2 fewer deaths per 1000 livebirths (95% CI –4.1 to 12.4; P = 0.30). Implementation of IMCI led to improved health-worker skills, health-system support, and family and community practices, translating into increased care-seeking for illnesses. In IMCI areas, more children younger than 6 months were exclusively breastfed (76% vs. 65%, difference of differences 10.1%, 95% CI 2.65–17.62), and prevalence of stunting in children aged 24–59 months decreased more rapidly (difference of differences –7.33, 95% CI –13.83 to –0.83) than in comparison areas. Interpretation Integrated Management of Childhood Illness was associated with positive changes in all input, output, and outcome indicators, including increased exclusive breastfeeding and decreased stunting. However, IMCI implementation had no effect on mortality within the timeframe of the assessment. Integrated Management of Childhood Illness is the accepted gold standard approach to reducing deaths from infections in children under 5 years in low-income countries. It is based on extensive evidence and incorporates a range of interventions and approaches to maximizing simple, early effective recognition and treatment of serious infections in young children. It ought to work but there have been few large scale evaluations of its implementation which measure the ultimate outcome of mortality. This cluster randomized trial in Bangladesh does this and finds a mixed and complex pattern of results. Mortality did not decline significantly, although towards the end of the trial, as implementation was stepped up, there did appear to be greater decline in the intervention areas. Perhaps the problem was one of low statistical power rather than of lack of effect. Nutritional indicators certainly improved, and process indicators such as the proportion of families exposed to the IMCI measures, and theappropriateness of treatment also improved. However, despite these improvements, implementation was patchy and less than optimal. In an accompanying editorial [Duke T. (2009) Child survival and IMCI: in need of sustained global support. Lancet, 374, 361–362], it is argued that a lack of commitment on the part of international and governmental funding and support has led to inadequate implementation rather than that IMCI is ineffective. It is further argued that the results of the study support this interpretation, and that what is needed is greater investment both financially and in terms of policy. These are an interesting set of papers and the broader picture is hopeful. Quite apart from implementing IMCI, mortality in Bangladesh fell in both areas dramatically, probably due to a combination of effective national prevention policies such as immunization, Vitamin A supplementation and improved nutrition. Richard Reading